Zen of Python
Also known as PEP 20, the guiding principles for Python’s design.

>>> import this
The Zen of Python, by Tim Peters

Beautiful is better than ugly.
Explicit is better than implicit.
Simple is better than complex.
Complex is better than complicated.
Flat is better than nested.
Sparse is better than dense.
Readability counts.
Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
Although practicality beats purity.
Errors should never pass silently.
Unless explicitly silenced.
In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
Now is better than never.
Although never is often better than *right* now.
If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!
For some examples of good Python style, see these slides from a Python user group.

PEP 8
PEP 8 is the de-facto code style guide for Python. A high quality, easy-to-read version of PEP 8 is also available at pep8.org.

This is highly recommended reading. The entire Python community does their best to adhere to the guidelines laid out within this document. Some project may sway from it from time to time, while others may amend its recommendations.

That being said, conforming your Python code to PEP 8 is generally a good idea and helps make code more consistent when working on projects with other developers. There is a command-line program, pep8, that can check your code for conformance. Install it by running the following command in your terminal:

$ pip install pep8
Then run it on a file or series of files to get a report of any violations.

$ pep8 optparse.py
optparse.py:69:11: E401 multiple imports on one line
optparse.py:77:1: E302 expected 2 blank lines, found 1
optparse.py:88:5: E301 expected 1 blank line, found 0
optparse.py:222:34: W602 deprecated form of raising exception
optparse.py:347:31: E211 whitespace before '('
optparse.py:357:17: E201 whitespace after '{'
optparse.py:472:29: E221 multiple spaces before operator
optparse.py:544:21: W601 .has_key() is deprecated, use 'in'
The program autopep8 can be used to automatically reformat code in the PEP 8 style. Install the program with:

$ pip install autopep8
Use it to format a file in-place with:

$ autopep8 --in-place optparse.py
Excluding the --in-place flag will cause the program to output the modified code directly to the console for review. The --aggressive flag will perform more substantial changes and can be applied multiple times for greater effect.
