
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
All you need to know about nature deficit disorder
By Helen Briggs
BBC News
26 November 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Even a flower in a crack in paving can lift spiritsImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Image caption
Even a flower in a crack in the paving can lift spirits
It's tough to connect with nature at this time of year.
Your days are spent under artificial lights in an office, while the last of autumn's blooms are hidden beneath piles of decaying leaves.
NDD, or nature deficit disorder, has become a buzzword of late.
Although it's not a recognised medical condition, concerns about its effects on wellbeing are attracting widespread attention.
"I guess it's a symptom of current lifestyle," says Dr Ross Cameron of the department of landscape at Sheffield University.
"We're so clued into modern technology and things that we're less observant about the world around us and we're more likely to learn about wildlife ironically from a David Attenborough programme than maybe from a walk in the woods."
Richard Louv coined the phrase Nature Deficit Disorder in his 2005 book Last Child in the Woods.
He argues that all of us, especially children, are spending more time indoors, which makes us feel alienated from nature and perhaps more vulnerable to negative moods or reduced attention span.
Dr Cameron gave his views on the subject in a lecture at the Royal Horticultural Society this month.
"[The phrase NDD] has been used as a bit of a coverall to describe the thing of where we used to have natural processes, natural experiences in our life, and that seems to be becoming less common," he told the BBC.
Ways to bring nature back into your life
Any green environment - from pot plants to weeds - can provide green space that attracts wildlife and exposes people to the benefits of the natural world.
Some green spaces are better than others - for example, small-leaved conifers such as the Scots pine and Junipers are good at capturing pollutant particles.
Fast-growing trees such as the Paulownia and Catalpa can lock up excess soil nitrates.
Source: Royal Horticultural Society
There's "another throwaway term, which is 'nature knowledge deficit', where we don't understand as much about the natural environment as we used to, he explains.
And if we don't experience natural places or "tinker around in the garden", this can be bad for our mental health.
"As biological beings we are physiologically adapted to be in certain environments - to run, to play, to hunt, to be active basically," says Dr Cameron.
"The reality is we tend to have the lifestyle of a brick at the minute. We tend to sit for most of the day - we tend to be very sedentary."
Trees like Catalpa have environmental benefitsImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Image caption
Trees like Catalpa have environmental benefits
His job is to think about how green spaces can be integrated into landscapes. So, could this be part of the solution?
"I've not sure I've got a cure," he laughs. "Landscape is obviously a very open-ended and undefined term.
"But basically any interaction with nature/green space seems to have some potential. I would argue that as you increase the scale and quality of it, the benefits also increase."
But he says even small and simple connections with nature can "give people a buzz", be it a robin at the front door or sitting in the garden watching a butterfly.
"We're quite interested to understand what those little positive effects have - those little things you notice in nature," he explains.
"You don't necessarily need to go to the Rockies or go to see blue whales off the Azores or anything like that.
"It's trying to see how much of these everyday things people notice, recognise and get a positive emotional response from."
Follow Helen on Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Nature deficit disorder 'damaging Britain's children'
30 March 2012
Related Internet links

RHS Home Page - RHS Gardening
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
 'Anti-homeless' slope installed in Liverpool doorway
'Anti-homeless' slope installed in Liverpool doorway
 Teacher's pet Gatsby the dachshund starts at Tickenham Primary School
Teacher's pet Gatsby the dachshund starts at Tickenham Primary…
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Tiger cub makes unlikely friend in Russia
Tiger cub makes unlikely friend in Russia
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
BBC News
Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
 Canadian reporter Ed Ou barred from entering US
BBC News
Canadian reporter Ed Ou barred from entering US
 What did IS do in key battles?
BBC News
What did IS do in key battles?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
BBC Autos
The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
 Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
BBC Culture
Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
10 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Which Musician Shares Your Birth Year?
Which Musician Shares Your Birth Year?
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous Countries
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
These Are the Worst Films of All Time
These Are the Worst Films of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Most Common Long Baby Names
The Most Common Long Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
LeBron James Scolds Teammates for Leaving Dirty Clothes All Over Locker Room Floor
LeBron James Scolds Teammates for Leaving Dirty…
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
