BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
selected
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Entertainment & Arts
Kanye West cancels entire Saint Pablo tour following stage rant
By Mark Savage
BBC Music reporter
6 hours ago
 From the section Entertainment & Arts
Share
Kanye West on the Saint Pablo tourImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Kanye West's innovative Saint Pablo tour is performed on a "floating" platform, suspended above the audience
Rapper Kanye West has cancelled all remaining dates on his Saint Pablo tour, two days after abandoning a show in Sacramento.
The star had performed just three songs on Saturday night, before embarking on an unscripted rant, criticising Facebook, Jay Z and Hillary Clinton.
He also claimed Beyonce would only agree to play the MTV Awards if she was given the video of the year prize.
After cancelling Sunday's show in LA, West has now scrapped all future dates.
"Tickets will be fully refunded within 5-7 business days," promoters Live Nation tweeted.
Los Angeles Times' music writer Gerrick Kennedy had previously alluded to the news on Twitter: "Just got word from a source that @kanyewest informed his crew that remaining dates of US #SaintPabloTour are nixed."
No reason has been given for the cancellation.
The Saint Pablo tour, in which West performed above the stage on an innovative "floating" platform, was scheduled for a further 21 dates before the end of 2016.
A much-rumoured European leg of the tour will now be cast into doubt.
Kanye West and Kim KardashianImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
West dashed to Kardashian's side after she was held at gunpoint during Paris Fashion Week
Although West's on stage behaviour has often been erratic, the star has perhaps been under added stress since his wife, Kim Kardashian, was robbed at gunpoint in Paris in October.
He learned of the incident while performing in New York and abruptly left the stage to be by her side.
West then cancelled several dates the following week but when the tour resumed in his hometown, Chicago, he appeared content to let the music do the talking.
Nearly a dozen dates passed without incident, until a show in Oakland on 22 October, when he called the Grammys "rigged" and lambasted the New York Post for publishing a story claiming Jay Z had called West a "nut job".
"A crazy person can't do all this," he said. "A crazy person can't make this floating stage."
"Stop writing negative [articles] about me and help me help people," he added.
He ended the night by lecturing the crowd on politics, at one point claiming: "We were brought over here as slaves, and Lincoln turned us into unpaid interns."
Kanye WestImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The star has a history of giving unscripted stage rants
On 4 November, he cut a show short after his voice failed, telling fans. "I'm so hoarse I can't finish the show. I'll give everyone a refund."
Then, last Thursday, West embarked on what local reports called a "25-minute-long rant" in which he voiced frustration with politics and told the crowd: "If I would have voted, I would have voted for Trump."
"I wanted to say that before the election, but they told me, 'Whatever you do, don't say that aloud,'" he added.
Angry fans responded by booing the star and throwing items on stage.
'Show's over'
On Saturday, he began his rant by complaining how radio stations favoured certain acts over others.
He later criticised Facebook boss Mark Zuckerberg for failing to give him $53m (£42.5m) to get out of debt and said he was hurt that Jay Z failed to visit his family after last month's robbery.
West then appeared to suggest that Jay Z employed hitmen, saying: "Jay Z, I know you got killers, please don't send them at my head".
Kanye WestImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The tour began in August. No reason has been given for the cancellation
"I've been sent here to give y'all my truth - even at the risk of my own life, even at the risk of my own success, my own career.
"Get ready to have a field day, press, because the show's over" he said, as he dropped his microphone and walked out of the concert.
Ticketholders were given a refund.
Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.
BBC
More on Kanye West
BBC Music homepage
BBC Music News LIVE
Related Topics
Music
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Kanye West reveals Donald Trump preference
18 November 2016
Kanye West cancels LA gig at the last minute following meltdown in Sacramento
21 November 2016
USA... Kanye says he's serious about becoming president
25 September 2015
Around the BBC

Kanye West - BBC Music
Related Internet links

Kanye West - Official site
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Entertainment & Arts
Selena Gomez
Selena Gomez makes emotional AMA speech
21 November 2016
From the section Entertainment & Arts
Full article Selena Gomez makes emotional AMA speech
Green Day
Music News round-up: 'No Trump' say Green Day
21 November 2016
Full article Music News round-up: 'No Trump' say Green Day
William Trevor
Writer William Trevor dies aged 88
21 November 2016
From the section Entertainment & Arts
Full article Writer William Trevor dies aged 88
 
More Videos from the BBC
 How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
 'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
 JK Rowling at Fantastic Beasts premiere: 'It was an accident'
JK Rowling at Fantastic Beasts premiere: 'It was an accident'
 100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Home Office refuses to grant British man's wife a visa
BBC News
Home Office refuses to grant British man's wife a visa
 Tata crisis: How do you sack a boss who won't go?
BBC News
Tata crisis: How do you sack a boss who won't go?
 Norwegians unimpressed by 'new' police uniforms
BBC News
Norwegians unimpressed by 'new' police uniforms
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The 22 syllables that can get you killed
BBC Culture
The 22 syllables that can get you killed
 Would you travel 700mph in a tube?
BBC Autos
Would you travel 700mph in a tube?
 A Sunday ritual for 300,000 women
BBC Travel
A Sunday ritual for 300,000 women
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
42 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3 minutes ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
4
Earthquake sparks Japan tsunami advisory
5
The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
6
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
7
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
8
An extremist in the family
9
Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
10
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
 
From Around the Web
 US Presidents That Actually Had Low IQs
US Presidents That Actually Had Low IQs
InsideGov | By Graphiq
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Arnold Schwarzenegger Opens Up to Fans on Live Chat
Arnold Schwarzenegger Opens Up to Fans…
Muscle and Fitness
Newscaster Mistakes Olympic Champ for Rookie Runner
Newscaster Mistakes Olympic Champ for Rookie…
Muscle & Fitness
Los Angeles Motor Show '16: Yamaha to Participate, Show off New Electric Motorbikes
Los Angeles Motor Show '16: Yamaha to Participate…
Response
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
