BBC
Accessibility links
Accessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
ADVERTISEMENT

Autos
Home 
Columns 
Alt-Green 
The Roundabout Blog 
JOIN THE CONVERSATION 
BBC Autos on Facebook
 Tesla Model X 
Review  Tesla  Electric vehicles
Driving the 'invincible' Tesla Model X
Top Gear's Stephen Dobie samples the US-based EV maker's 'exceedingly fast' electric SUV.
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Reddit
Share on StumbleUpon
Share on Google+
Share by Email
By Editors From Top Gear
21 November 2016
The Jaguar I-Pace electric crossover concept earned quite a lot of praise when it made its debut last week at the Los Angeles Auto Show. And there's no denying the production-bound concept car is a tantalising glimpse of Jaguar's next act. But as Tesla boosters were ever-so-quick to highlight, the wildly clever vehicle that inspired the I-Pace is already here: the US-based EV maker's Model X. TopGear.com's Stephen Dobie recently took the wheel of the vaunted American sport-utility (electric) vehicle in the UK, to see how it handles bumpy British back roads. His thoughts? "I can’t think of a car in this class – or of this size – that is so effortless to drive in such a variety conditions."
On its handling
It’s right up there with the best sports SUVs when it comes to shrugging off its size and (2.4-tonne!) weight, and acting like a traditional sports saloon. Its four-wheel-drive system is a major help in this. Apply a hooligan amount of throttle out of a wet roundabout and there is simply no drama, as the Model X’s instant torque – 485 pound-feet of it in the 90D – is shuffled around the four wheels so that it’s best and most safely deployed. There’s an almost invincible air to it, with the speed you can carry into and out of corners simply not in line with the size and weight of the Model X.
On its back-road abilities
Its ginormous windscreen may look like it’s got a receding roofline, but the result is fish-bowl front visibility, supplemented by the lane display under the speedometer, which shows precisely where between the white lines you are.
Tesla Model X 
On its motorway prowess
It’s an utterly serene motorway cruiser. There’s a tad more noise than you might expect inside – a bit of road roar from the tyres, exaggerated by the extra cabin room over a Model S, I suspect – but you need to experience a fully electric car to appreciate how much edge they take off the fuss of driving. Yes, we like engine noise when driving a car fast. But during a commute, silence feels pretty golden.
On its fabled acceleration
Tesla is good at providing the kind of eye-boggling acceleration I can only liken to a supercharged Ariel Atom or a launch-controlled Porsche 911 Turbo S. Some of that comes from the sheer mass you’re moving, but the faintest squeeze of the accelerator at the end of a village sees you hit the national speed limit almost as soon as you spotted the sign.
On its self-driving talent
[Our] test car came with the first-generation Tesla ‘Autopilot’ hardware (UK cars will all get the second-gen hardware), but the latest software, which is meant to give you a nudge when you take your hands off the wheel for too long. Popping it into self-drive mode is a doddle. Pull the shorter stalk on the left of the steering column, and the cruise control activates. Pull it again (so long as you’re going 70mph or below) and, if the car is happy with the conditions it’s in, the self-steer begins too. It’s much, much smoother than our first try of the tech a year ago and is now very good at following curved sections of motorway. Flick the indicator left or right and it’ll change into the lane you’ve picked, though you need your hands on the wheel for this, somewhat negating its purpose.
Tesla Model X 
On its 'Falcon Wing' doors
They’re at once brilliant and a gimmick. Though I say this as someone who clonked his head on one as it closed unexpectedly. The rear doors themselves are a clever work of art, adjusting the angle at which they arc up and down in relation to how close you are to other cars. Or something harder, like a wall. But it’s the operation of them that takes some getting used to; both front and back doors move electrically, using buttons inside, outside or on the key fob. And it takes a little mental recalibration to stop them operating when you don’t mean them too. You’d really want to know your kids’ hands were out the way before closing the rear doors. And yes, the car is meant to sense that sort of thing – but would you trust it 100%?
On its place in the market
It’s a big car with a specialist remit, but the Model X 90D’s combination of 417 horsepower, up to 303 miles on a charge and (optional) seven seats suggests it could be the one-car-for-everything for the well-heeled. While not outright fun to drive, it’s very, very impressive. And exceedingly fast. I doubt the novelty of its acceleration would ever fully wear off.
Editor's note:
Earlier this month, Tesla discontinued the top-spec Model X, the P90D, and replaced it with the P100D, which features a larger battery pack and a 289-mile range, a bump of 39 miles, along with a £117,200 price tag, £17,000 more than the P90D.
Tesla Model X 
Read Stephen Dobie's full story, with photos by Simon Thompson, here, and if you haven't already done so, join the TG community on Facebook.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called “If You Only Read 6 Things This Week”. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Autos, Future, Earth, Culture, Capital and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.
Read more from  Top Gear logo 1920 x 1080 
The Stig 
Share this article:
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Reddit
Share on StumbleUpon
Share on Google+
Share by Email
ADVERTISEMENT

Related Stories
Mg 7269 
Tesla Model X review: electric SUV driven in the UK
 Tesla Model S 
Driven: Tesla's 'astonishing' new ride
 Jagipacestudioexterior14111606 
Jaguar unveils its electric future
Follow BBC Autos
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Tumblr
The Best Of Autos
(Credit: Kevin Frayer / Getty Images)
The story behind China's 'digital' camo
 Cynko e-bike (Credit: Engeenius)
The 10 most beautiful bicycles
 Star Cars Promo (Credit: Scott Park)
Can you identify these star cars?
 Oshkosh L-ATV 
War machines for sale
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
ADVERTISEMENT

More amazing Autos stories
Charge truck concept 
Smartphone designer reinvents the lorry
 Overhead bin 
The end of free carry-on luggage?
 2017 rt24p front 001 
The Los Angeles Auto Show in 90 seconds
 Retro airline food 
Why is airline food so bad?
 Jagipacestudioexterior14111606 
Jaguar unveils its electric future
 (Credit: Getty Images)
Why Trump won’t be allowed to drive
Around the BBC
 
Future
20 world-changing ideas
  
Future
We’ve got human intelligence all wrong
  
Culture
What Zadie Smith can teach us
  
Culture
The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
  
Capital
Your desk says a lot about who you are
  
Capital
The expats who don’t want to come home
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
