
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Trump: The best thing ever for climate change?
Matt McGrath
Environment correspondent
19 November 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
trumpImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
On the campaign trail Mr Trump repeatedly called for the renegotiation of the Paris Climate Agreement
Since the US election result, there has been consternation among climate campaigners and many environment ministers, especially those attending the annual Conference of the Parties (COP) in Marrakech.
The fear, and fury of the green response to Donald Trump is understandable.
Here's a man who has promised to "cancel" the Paris Climate Agreement, and who tweeted that climate change was a hoax invented by the Chinese - though he did seem to dispute this accusation during a presidential debate.
However his admiration for the coal industry and his determination to revive it are not in doubt. None of that sits well with those who believe that climate change is the greatest threat facing the planet.
But there is another school of thought that says that a Trump presidency could actually aid the fight against climate change.
'Overblown as his haircut'
The Paris agreement became part of international law in super-quick time, mainly because countries were aware of Mr Trump's threats to wreck the deal.
"His negative impact is as overblown as his haircut," said Joe Ware from Christian Aid.
"He's already generated the fastest coming into force of any treaty with the ratification of the Paris treaty in record time."
If Mr Trump decides to withdraw the US from the Paris Climate Agreement it would be a blow to the deal - but not the terminal one that many fear.
China, India and all the major emitters have reiterated their belief at this conference that the deal is irreversible and they will honour their commitments. Mr Trump appears to have forged a spirit of unity among all parties at the conference, even the World Coal Association (WCA).
"What we are focussed on is how do we implement the Paris agreement and how do we support countries to implement their nationally determined contributions," said Benjamin Sporton from the WCA.
trumpImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
US students taking part in a protest at the climate talks in Marrakech
"That's what Marrakech has been about, and from our perspective that needs to include the focus on low emissions coal technology."
The spirit of unity is also likely to be felt in the US if the new president makes good on his promises to boost coal exports and allow the extraction of oil and gas on Federal lands.
Environmental movements are already reporting an increase in membership enquiries.
If President Trump revives the Keystone pipeline, he could galvanise a new generation of climate activists.
"Young people in the US know well that it is ridiculous to be denying climate," said former Irish president and UN climate envoy Mary Robinson.
"In so far as it is, it seems to me to be an issue that some lobbyists want fossil fuel to continue, that is a last gasp, like the tobacco industry and it's not going to succeed."
Money for green measures
One of Mr Trump's most prominent campaign promises has been on revitalising America's infrastructure.
This is an issue on which he might garner much political support.
City mayors and other authorities are likely to want to see some of that cash spent on green measures like energy efficiency in offices, homes and buildings.
It saves energy, which saves money - and reduces emissions significantly.
So will insulation make America great again?
"Energy efficiency is the silver bullet for a lot of our problems with climate change and energy poverty," said Joe Ware.
coalImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Donald Trump's support for the coal industry won votes during the election but dismayed green activists
"That has got an appeal to conservatives and liberals and that could really be something that becomes a Donald Trump cross-party success story."
If Trump spends heavily on infrastructure and pursues the use of gas for generating electricity and also spends money on developing cleaner coal, it could turn out that his impact on US emissions will be more positive than most people believe.
And even if he isn't a climate angel, there are other factors that would limit the damage he could do to the progress the US has already made. US Cities and states have already taken significant action. They won't be turning back.
"We survived eight years of George Bush and we were in a much more fragile system then," said Joe Ware.
"We didn't have Paris, we didn't have China leading the way, we didn't have the technology transition we are in at the moment.
"I think he'll be more limited than a lot of people are getting worried about now."
Follow Matt on Twitter and on Facebook
Related Topics
Donald Trump
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More Science & Environment stories
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
4 hours ago
Read full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution' 
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
Read full article Fossils tell story of early life on land 
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
Read full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
10 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
