
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Caesarean births 'affecting human evolution'
By Helen Briggs
BBC News
4 hours ago
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesareanImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Image caption
In the UK, about one in four babies is born by Caesarean
The regular use of Caesarean sections is having an impact on human evolution, say scientists.
More mothers now need surgery to deliver a baby due to their narrow pelvis size, according to a study.
Researchers estimate cases where the baby cannot fit down the birth canal have increased from 30 in 1,000 in the 1960s to 36 in 1,000 births today.
Historically, these genes would not have been passed from mother to child as both would have died in labour.
Researchers in Austria say the trend is likely to continue, but not to the extent that non-surgical births will become obsolete.
Dr Philipp Mitteroecker, of the department of theoretical biology at the University of Vienna, said there was a long standing question in the understanding of human evolution.
"Why is the rate of birth problems, in particular what we call fetopelvic disproportion - basically that the baby doesn't fit through the maternal birth canal - why is this rate so high?" he said.
"Without modern medical intervention such problems often were lethal and this is, from an evolutionary perspective, selection.
"Women with a very narrow pelvis would not have survived birth 100 years ago. They do now and pass on their genes encoding for a narrow pelvis to their daughters."
Opposing forces
It has been a long standing evolutionary question why the human pelvis has not grown wider over the years.
The head of a human baby is large compared with other primates, meaning animals such as chimps can give birth relatively easily.
The researchers devised a mathematical model using data from the World Health Organization and other large birth studies.
They found opposing evolutionary forces.
One is a trend towards larger newborns, which are more healthy.
However, if they grow too large, they get stuck during labour, which historically would have proved disastrous for mother and baby, and their genes would not be passed on.
"One side of this selective force - namely the trend towards smaller babies - has vanished due to Caesarean sections," said Dr Mitteroecker.
"Our intent is not to criticise medical intervention," he said. "But it's had an evolutionary effect. "
Future trends
The researchers estimated that the global rate of cases where the baby could not fit through the maternal birth canal was 3%, or 30 in 1,000 births.
Over the past 50 or 60 years, this rate has increased to about 3.3-3.6%, so up to 36 in 1,000 births.
That is about a 10-20% increase of the original rate, due to the evolutionary effect.
"The pressing question is what's going to happen in the future?" Dr Mitteroecker said.
"I expect that this evolutionary trend will continue but perhaps only slightly and slowly.
"There are limits to that. So I don't expect that one day the majority of children will have to be born by [Caesarean] sections."
The research is published in the journal, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Follow Helen on Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Science & Environment
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
Felled forest (Getty Images)
Deforestation 'still cause for concern'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Deforestation 'still cause for concern'
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
 What is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
What is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Five things you might not know about Ghana election
Five things you might not know about Ghana election
 Prescot fire: Firefighters tackle warehouse blaze
Prescot fire: Firefighters tackle warehouse blaze
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Brexit: EU nationals 'will need documentation to stay in UK'
BBC News
Brexit: EU nationals 'will need documentation to stay in UK'
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
BBC News
Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Is it rude to recline your seat?
BBC Autos
Is it rude to recline your seat?
 The power of a beam of light
BBC Culture
The power of a beam of light
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for Cleaner Energy
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for…
Dassault Systemes
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
Video: Citi’s Advisory Services Helps Build Health Campus
Video: Citi’s Advisory Services Helps Build…
Citi Blog
You'll Want to Steal These British Baby Names
You'll Want to Steal These British Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The 25 Least Popular Dogs to Own
The 25 Least Popular Dogs to Own
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
These Are the 39 Worst Movies Ranked From Bad to Really Bad
These Are the 39 Worst Movies Ranked From Bad…
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
