BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Education & Family
Bletchley Park: 'Codebreakers school' planned for site
By Sean Coughlan
Education correspondent
24 November 2016
 From the section Education & Family
Share
Bletchley ParkImage copyrightREX FEATURES
Image caption
Staff working on decoding projects at Bletchley in 1940
Bletchley Park, the site of secret code-deciphering projects during World War Two, could become the centre for a new generation of codemakers and codebreakers.
There are plans for a training college to teach cybersecurity skills to 16-19 year olds at the Buckinghamshire site.
Former home secretary Lord Reid said it had become vital to build up the "talent pool" for cyber-defence.
The college, in a wartime building at Bletchley, is intended to open in 2018.
Developed by a not-for-profit group from the cybersecurity industry, it would open as a boarding college, with around 10% of places for day students.
The National College of Cybersecurity would be free to all students, who would be selected as "gifted and talented".
The BBC understands that candidates would not need to meet specific academic qualifications, but would be selected through aptitude tests, or on the basis of exceptional technology skills - such as self-taught coders or students who dabble in making their own websites.
The students would work towards a potential variety of qualifications including A levels or Extended Project Qualification (EPQs). Around 40% of the curriculum would be devoted to cybersecurity - with extra focus on maths, physics, computer science or economics.
Bletchley ParkImage copyrightPA
Image caption
Bletchley Park was a base for wartime efforts to decipher encrypted messages
There have been repeated warnings about the lack of a skilled workforce for cybersecurity in the UK, despite a rising number of sophisticated cyber-attacks.
A spokesperson for the GCHQ intelligence agency welcomed such "initiatives that promote and develop skills in cybersecurity".
"The concept of a sixth-form college is interesting, especially if it can provide a pathway for talented students from schools that are not able to provide the support they need," the spokesperson added.
The project plans to use G-Block, built in 1943, on the Bletchley Park site as the base for the college, with a £5m restoration project for the building.
Bletchley Park: Britain's best kept secret
A re-creation of Colossus mark II
Image caption
The wartime team at Bletchley Park created the world's first computer
Bletchley House was Britain's best kept secret for decades. No one was allowed to talk about the work that was carried out there during World War Two - and it was not until a veteran code-breaker spilled the beans in 1974 that its existence became known.
During the war, it housed the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS) which worked on cracking the military codes that secured German, Japanese and other enemy nation's communications.
Alan TuringImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The Bletchley Park wartime team included code-breaker Alan Turing
The work of the wartime team, which included the computer scientist Alan Turing, heralded the dawn of the information age - creating the world's first computer, Colossus - and was famed for breaking the German Enigma encryption system.
After the war, some of the staff stayed on in a new organisation, Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ).
Now one of three UK intelligence and security agencies, along with MI5 and MI6, GCHQ works to keep the UK safe.
GCHQ in CheltenhamImage copyrightPA
Image caption
British Intelligence moved GCHQ to a new site in Cheltenham in 1987
GCHQ credits its "particularly strong" relationship with its US equivalent, the National Security Agency, to the collaboration it began at Bletchley Park and agreements it signed at the end of World War Two.
Bletchley Park was decommissioned in 1987 after a 50 year association with British Intelligence, which relocated GCHQ to Cheltenham. There are also smaller sites in Cornwall, North Yorkshire and Manchester.
In 1991, moves to demolish the site sparked an eight year battle to save Bletchley Park and keep its wartime story alive. The Bletchley Park Trust is now working on a 10-year plan to transform the site into a world-class museum and education centre.
The plan for training a new generation of codebreakers at Bletchley comes from a group called Qufaro, set up by cybersecurity representatives, including from Cyber Security Challenge UK, The National Museum of Computing and BT Security.
Funding and development comes from Qufaro in collaboration with the Cyber Security Challenge UK - a government and industry backed-competition that seeks people with the the skills needed to help the UK beat back cyber criminals, hacktivists and terrorists. It also has the backing of City and Guilds, which provides vocational qualifications.
Alastair MacWilson, of the Institute of Information Security Professionals and chair of Qufaro, says cyber-education at the moment is "disconnected and incomplete, putting us at risk of losing a whole generation of critical talent".
He says that the Qufaro project would help to provide a more "unified" approach to try to fill the gaps in training.
G block at Bletchley ParkImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Block G at Bletchley, which could be restored to house the cybersecurity school
Margaret Sale, founding member of the National Museum of Computing, said setting up a college would help to "reactivate" the site as a "major active contributor to our national security".
Lord Reid, who chairs the Institute for Security and Resilience Studies at University College London, said cyber-activity "now reaches into every aspect of our lives, as individuals and as a nation".
Bletchley ParkImage copyrightPA
Image caption
Wartime decoding equipment used at Bletchley Park
But he said there was a challenge in "developing a sustainable flow of skilled professionals for security, growth and cyber-innovation.
"Existing initiatives cannot close the skills gap alone so it is vital that we keep looking for new ways to build our talent pool," he stressed.
He said the plans for a National College of Cyber Security could "harness the legacy of this historic location to inspire the next generation".
Related Topics
Computer security
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

UK must retaliate against cyber-attacks says chancellor
1 November 2016
UK moves to ‘active cyber-defence’
13 September 2016
'Alan Turing law': Thousands of gay men to be pardoned
20 October 2016
Video Duchess of Cambridge to open restored Bletchley Park
18 June 2014
Bletchley Park 75 years on
18 June 2014
Why is Google in love with Bletchley Park?
16 November 2011
Related Internet links

GCHQ Site
Bletchley Park
Qufaro
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Education & Family
Animated tattoos
Beckham tattoos in child abuse campaign
5 December 2016
From the section Education & Family
Full article Beckham tattoos in child abuse campaign
Parent taking child to school
Parents in north 'should be more pushy'
5 December 2016
From the section Education & Family 380 comments
Full article Parents in north 'should be more pushy'
Muslim women cross a road in west London, File photo - May 2014
Segregation at 'worrying levels'
5 December 2016
 From the section UK
Full article Segregation at 'worrying levels'
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Prescot fire: Firefighters tackle warehouse blaze
Prescot fire: Firefighters tackle warehouse blaze
 'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
 Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
 How a church song inspired a viral dance craze
How a church song inspired a viral dance craze
 Thanksgiving traffic jam is 'most epic'
Thanksgiving traffic jam is 'most epic'
 Women blamed for miscarriages call for understanding
Women blamed for miscarriages call for understanding
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Football Leaks: Ronaldo and Mourinho accused of tax avoidance
BBC News
Football Leaks: Ronaldo and Mourinho accused of tax avoidance
 Six family members killed in Austrian house near St Poelten
BBC News
Six family members killed in Austrian house near St Poelten
 Eddie Izzard's homophobic attacker given suspended sentence
BBC News
Eddie Izzard's homophobic attacker given suspended sentence
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 A museum of 500,000 oddities
BBC Travel
A museum of 500,000 oddities
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
10 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up Aviation
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up…
Dassault Systemes
Charlotte Among 25 Top French Baby Names
Charlotte Among 25 Top French Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
26 Signs a Girl Likes You
26 Signs a Girl Likes You
Men's Fitness
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB Team
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Couples in Hollywood
The Most Famous Couples in Hollywood
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
Numberprep Maths Tuition
Oxbridge, Masters &PhD maths tutors Amersham based, win free half term
www.numberprep.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
