BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FOOTBALL
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Live Scores
Results
Fixtures
Tables
Gossip
All Teams
Leagues & Cups
European
Women
African
Predictor
Nick Bunyard: Banned non-league manager 'bet £2,200 on his side to lose one match'

9 hours ago From the section Football
Share this page
 
Betting 'rife' in football - banned manager
A non-league manager banned for betting staked more than £2,200 on his team to lose a specific game, the Football Association has revealed.

Nick Bunyard was given a three-year ban and fined £3,000 on 9 November, after placing 45 bets against his own teams.

In releasing their written reasons for the ban, the FA said that Bunyard made a £1,436 profit when his Frome Town side lost at Weymouth on 2 April 2016.

The FA commission accepted Bunyard was not involved in match-fixing.

In total, Bunyard breached regulations with 97 bets, staking a total of £6,888.24 at an average of £71 per bet, producing a net profit of £2,612.74.

Of the 73 bets he placed on matches involving either Frome Town or former club Paulton Rovers, he made a net profit of £1,924.29.

Relating to the 2-0 loss to Weymouth, Bunyard placed 19 bets on the match, using four different markets, with four different betting operators.

The bets he placed on Frome to lose - totalling £2,201 - included a specific market that they would do so by more than 1.5 goals - and Weymouth's second goal was scored in the 89th minute.

However, the FA stressed that is was "not their case that Bunyard was involved in 'fixing' or influencing the outcome of any of the matches in which he placed bets on his own team to lose [or to win]".

An outfield player played in goal for Frome in the match at Weymouth because they had four registered goalkeepers unavailable, the FA statement revealed.

Frome, who play in England's seventh tier, have said that Bunyard's three-year ban was "excessive" in comparison to more high-profile cases.

FA rules prohibit "all those involved in the game" from betting on football "that takes place anywhere in the world".

The defence Bunyard put to the commission stated that the bets against his teams had "not been done as a calculated way to profit, but were based on unavoidable facts about injured, suspended or unavailable players" and were attempts to "soften the blow" if they lost.

He told BBC Somerset that betting "is part of the culture of football," and, since the ban, he has announced his retirement from the game.
Share this page
Find out more

Match of the Day Facebook

Read more on Match of the Day Facebook
Match of the Day Twitter

Read more on Match of the Day Twitter
BBC Sport Facebook

Read more on BBC Sport Facebook
BBC Sport Twitter

Read more on BBC Sport Twitter
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Related to this story

Manager's betting punishment 'excessive'

11d From the section Football
Read more on Nick Bunyard: Frome Town criticise FA over manager's 'excessive' ban
Betting 'rife' in football - banned manager

11d From the section Football
Read more on Nick Bunyard: Banned ex-Frome Town manager claims "betting is rife" in football
Frome Town manager banned over betting

12d From the section Football
Read more on Nick Bunyard: Frome Town boss banned by FA over betting
Premier League Predictor: Play now

6 Aug
Read more on Premier League Predictor: Play now

 
From Around the Web
 The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language…
Babbel
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Check Out This Goalkeeper's Unique Celebration
Check Out This Goalkeeper's Unique Celebration
Muscle and Fitness
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of addicted players!
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of…
Soldiers
Promoted content by Outbrain
BBC Sport features
Football alerts, newsletters and social media
Get latest scores and headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Gossip column logo
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.
5 live's football daily podcast
Commentaries, clips and podcasts
Enjoy the best debate, analysis and interviews with 5 live and World Service football plus our commentary listings.
Women playing football
How to get into Football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
