BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
US & Canada
selected
ADVERTISEMENT

Presidential phone calls: How do world leaders talk to each other?
By Vicky Baker
BBC News
5 December 2016
 From the section US & Canada
Share
Donald Trump taking a call on his private plane in 2000Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Donald Trump taking a call on his private plane in 2000
US President-elect Donald Trump has been making headlines with his unconventional approach to diplomatic phone calls.
According to the New York Times, US foreign allies "were blindly dialling in to Trump Tower" in the days after the national election.
Further upset was caused when Mr Trump announced he had spoken directly to the Taiwanese president, Tsai Ing-wen, even though formal relations between the US and Taiwan were cut almost 40 years ago at China's behest.
But what is normal procedure for conversations between world leaders? Here are some of the steps taken to smooth out the process and avoid potential pitfalls, from linguistic misunderstandings to prank callers.
Hi, it's Putin, is Obama in?
US President Barack Obama on the phoneImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
US President Barack Obama on the phone in the Oval Office of the White House
"Hello, can I speak to the president?" is not an off-the-cuff request an operator is ever likely to hear from a world leader.
By the time the initial pleasantries are exchanged between heads of state, the groundwork will have been done behind the scenes by the leaders' respective staff.
"When there is an established relationship between two countries, it might be as simple as one situation room calling its counterpoint and saying my head of state wants to speak to yours," says Stephen Yates, who worked as deputy national security adviser to former US Vice-President Dick Cheney.
When countries are in less frequent contact, an ambassador may make the first formal request on their leader's behalf. They will set out the proposed agenda and reasons for the call and, if agreed, the reciprocal team would then work it into busy schedules.
A helping hand for big issues and small talk
World leaders are typically well briefed before speaking to each other.
In the US, the president is given a dossier from the National Security Council (NSC), the principal US advisory body on national security and foreign policy.
If it is a simple courtesy call, the information provided may be basic, including details on who initiated contact, and two or three recommended talking points. There may also be some need-to-know personal information, such as a reminder to ask after a sick husband or wife.
If the topic is sensitive, the NSC will offer the president an additional short briefing, and then listen in on the call.
Are we alone now?
Russian President Vladimir Putin and the German Chancellor Angela MerkelImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Russian President Vladimir Putin and German Chancellor Angela Merkel both speak each other's language but may prefer to use their mother tongue on the phone
World leaders usually have various people listening in on their conversations, including aides and interpreters.
Even when leaders speak another language fluently, they often choose to conduct official calls in their mother tongue.
"Sometimes that is down to national pride, but it's also to avoid misunderstandings and protect nuance," says Kevin Hendzel, a former White House linguist.
US presidential translators will have passed security clearances, background checks and even sat polygraph tests, before they become privy to sensitive information involved in high-level diplomacy.
"There are no novices that work at the presidential level," says Mr Hendzel. "It takes a great deal of time for an interpreter to reach this stage. They are also experts in the subject matter, and they know getting a form of address wrong can be a deal breaker."
'I am Hillary Clinton, honestly, I am'
Hillary Clinton with a mobile phoneImage copyrightAFP / GETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Hillary Clinton reported problems getting past White House operators when she was US secretary of state
"It's apples and oranges when you are comparing transitional calls by a president-elect to those of a head of state in the Oval Office," says Mr Yates.
Once Mr Trump is in the hot seat, all his calls will be highly secure and heavily vetted.
"The president will feel like he has just picked up the phone, like any other call, but the call will have been through multiple checks to ensure its fidelity," says Mr Yates.
Sometimes this vetting process can be so tight, the wrong people get cut off. "I am fighting w[ith] the WH [White House] operator who doesn't believe I am who I say," wrote exasperated Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in a 2010 email.
Presidents get pranked, too
Former Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and ex-Cuban leader Fidel Castro embraceImage copyrightBBC SPORT
Image caption
Former Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and ex-Cuban leader Fidel Castro were close allies
Prank calls to presidents are rare, but not unheard of.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy fell victim to hoax in January, when a radio presenter phoned imitating the new separatist leader of Catalonia.
In 2003, a US radio station based in Miami scored the double, when it tricked both the then Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and his close ally, the former leader of Cuba, Fidel Castro.
Radio El Zol first called Chavez, pretending to be Castro, and then called Castro masquerading as Chavez. When the Cuban realised he had been tricked, he unleashed a torrent of swearwords.
Different radio DJs have also fooled Evo Morales, when he was Bolivia's president-elect in 2005 (pretending to be then Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero), and the Queen (pretending to be Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien in 1995).
The hotline that is not a phone
The Moscow-Washington hotline, often referred to the "red telephone", is a special, highly secure system that allows direct communication between the leaders of the United States and Russia.
"Contrary to the myths, it's not actually a phone," explains Kevin Hendzel, who worked as senior technical linguist on the project in the 1980s.
The line, used to send text and images (maps, diagrams etc), was developed after the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, when the two countries came close to a nuclear war.
It remains an open channel, allowing instant communication if needed. "Because when it comes to nuclear missiles, everything is measured in minutes," says Mr Hendzel.
Related Topics
Barack ObamaDonald Trump
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

That 'tremendous' call between Trump and Pakistan's PM Nawaz Sharif
1 December 2016
Trump-Taiwan call: China lodges protest
3 December 2016
Golfer set up Australian PM's call with Donald Trump
16 November 2016
US & Canada
Father and son
Hot car death father sentenced to life
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Hot car death father sentenced to life
Al Gore on an elevator
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
Motorist Walter Scott (L) is seen in this composite photo with former South Carolina officer Michael Slager (R).
Mistrial in US police killing of driver
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Mistrial in US police killing of driver
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 Jigsaw boss: Black Friday is a 'complete and utter deception'
Jigsaw boss: Black Friday is a 'complete and utter deception'
 'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
 'We cannot hide from an uncomfortable truth'
'We cannot hide from an uncomfortable truth'
 Extracting the valuable metals from your smartphone
Extracting the valuable metals from your smartphone
 The Indian village that has returned to bartering
The Indian village that has returned to bartering
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Australia Day: Fremantle banned from citizenship ceremonies
BBC News
Australia Day: Fremantle banned from citizenship ceremonies
 Segregation at 'worrying levels' in parts of Britain, Dame Louise Casey warns
BBC News
Segregation at 'worrying levels' in parts of Britain, Dame Louise Casey warns
 Kansas sperm donor to same-sex couple not liable for child support
BBC News
Kansas sperm donor to same-sex couple not liable for child support
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
BBC Autos
The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
 The power of a beam of light
BBC Culture
The power of a beam of light
 Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
BBC Autos
Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Dassault Systemes
9 Crazy Successful People And The First Jobs That Got Them Where They Are
9 Crazy Successful People And The First Jobs That…
Citi Blog
Why Time Management is the Key to a Successful Career
Why Time Management is the Key to a…
Citi Blog
U.S. Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
U.S. Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Don't Even Think about Visiting the Top 25 Dangerous Countries in this List
Don't Even Think about Visiting the Top 25…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
고음질 전용 블루투스리시버
SLASH-R, 고성능 DAC 사용. 하이파이에 스마트폰 무선 연결
interpark.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
