BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Magazine
Europe's outdoor cannabis capital
By Linda Pressly
BBC News, Albania
1 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Share
Police destroy a cannabis plantation in Ducaj (2009)Image copyrightAFP
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
The city getting rich from fake news
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
Albania has become the largest producer of outdoor-grown cannabis in Europe. The potent plant has been described as "green gold" for struggling farmers. In a poor nation, it's a billion-euro industry.
Off a dirt road, in a small village north of Tirana, there's a half-built, tumble-down, brick house. It stands alone and looks abandoned. It isn't. The sweet, heady odour that seeps from one of the rooms reveals its current function: cannabis production. Inside, more than half the floor space is covered with buds of the drying drug.
"There's about 20kg here," says the man who owns it. He is young - late 20s maybe - dressed in skinny jeans, a tight top and trainers. And he is one of thousands making money from the cannabis boom.
Cannabis farmers feet, and buds drying on the floor
White line 10 pixels
Cannabis buds, drying
In Albania, a kilo of this illegal drug sells for between 100 and 200 euros (£85 to £170). In Italy it will fetch about 1,500 euros. And most of the country's cannabis crop is trafficked out - north through Montenegro, south to Greece, or west across the Adriatic to Italy. There is no significant home market. One source estimates the illicit industry may be worth five billion euros (£4.25bn) per year - about half of Albania's GDP.
The 20kg of stinking greenery slowly drying in the sunlight that streams through an open window does not represent this man's entire crop.
"I've produced 350kg," he says. "This year almost every single house in the village grew cannabis - tons and tons have been produced in this community alone."
This man employs 15 people to pick and process, and armed guards to defend his crop. He says he is in charge here, but he probably belongs to a wider network. So if everyone is growing it, and that seems to be common knowledge, why has there been no police raid?
"I pay the police 20%. Everybody has to pay. If you don't pay they will take you to jail," he says.
Then, he gets defensive.
"This is our curse - there are no jobs, no work here. There's no money in growing anything else. I know it's not a good thing I'm doing, but there's no other way."
Police store room, with bags of cannabis
Image caption
Police vaults store thousands of bags of cannabis seized in raids
For decades Albanians lived under a punishing, closed regime. Then, after communism fell, came a period marked by civil unrest and the rapid growth of organised crime. Twenty-five years later, unemployment is still high and corruption rife - conditions that enable the cannabis trade to flourish.
The government has had some success in its fight against the illegal industry.
It says more than two million cannabis plants have been destroyed this year, and now that the growing season is over, police are concentrating on confiscating the drug as it is prepared for trafficking out of Albania.
Some of the hauls have been huge.
In a vast warehouse in the town of Rreshen, tucked into the foothills of the mountains north of Tirana, tier after tier of drying cannabis is laid out on mesh shelves. On the concrete floor, there are more waist-high mounds of the drug. Sacks of it lie around, and it spills out of the open back doors of a transit van.
Cannabis in warehouse
White line 10 pixels
Cannabis carelessly loaded into van
In the middle of this sea of weed - his woolly hat pulled low, his glasses on the end of his nose, and a gun at his hip - is the police officer in charge, Agron Cullhaj, who describes it as the largest ever find in this area.
If you compare figures for 2015 and 2016, they reveal a five-fold increase in the area cultivated with cannabis
In this one location there are more than four tonnes of cannabis, with a street value in Italy of some six million euros (£5m).
"When I took office in 2013, I started to plan huge action against the illegal cultivation of cannabis," says the Home Minister, Saimir Tahiri.
In their mission to rid Albania of the cannabis scourge, the government has the support of the Italians. The Guardia di Finanza pays for aerial surveillance to identify plantations, and it is their statistics that Albanian politicians quote.
"From 2013 to 2016, the figures show more than a 30% decrease in the area of Albania cultivated with cannabis. That means we're on the right path," says Tahiri.
The 30% decrease came about largely because a mammoth police operation in 2014 destroyed the well-entrenched cannabis industry in Lazarat, a southern village once notorious as the drug capital of Europe. In the raid - employing firepower, special forces and armoured vehicles - many tonnes of cannabis were seized and thousands of plants destroyed.
Police fan out through Lazarat (June 2014)Image copyrightAFP
White line 10 pixels
Smoke rising from Dervican, near Lazarat (June 2014)Image copyrightAFP
But if you compare the Italians' figures for 2015 and 2016, they reveal a five-fold increase in the area cultivated with cannabis. Sources within Albania suggest many communities have turned to drug production for the first time this year.
Corruption is critical to the success of this illicit business - something the Home Minister recognises.
"For sure police have been corrupted," he says. "Since my first day in office, more than 3,000 police officers are under criminal or disciplinary investigations. That's nearly 20% of the whole troop."
Not all of those officers have been fingered over cannabis, though. Corruption in Albania bleeds into so many cracks of everyday life.
line
Find out more
Listen to Albania's cannabis boom on BBC Radio 4's Crossing Continents at 11:00 on Thursday 1 December - or catch up later on the BBC iPlayer
The programme can also be heard on Assignment on the BBC World Service
line
Another reason the cannabis trade is hard to stub out is that it pays well - about 20 euros (£17) a day in some places.
"As a waiter I got paid only a third of what I earned with cannabis," says a 20-year-old, whose parents stopped him going to work when they found out what he was doing.
He lives on the outskirts of Tirana, in a suburb that rural families migrated to when the communist edifice collapsed in the early 1990s. They came looking for work, but more than two decades later it is still hard to find regular, legal employment. Weed has filled a gap.
"At 4am you see crowds of people outside going to work," says the young man. "The streets are full - women, men, young people - even children…"
Fleets of minivans carry workers out to the countryside. In the growing season they labour in the plantations. After the harvest, they prepare and pack the drug ready for its illicit export.
Critics say it's these daily workers who are most likely to be caught in police raids, while the big fish escape. And that even if someone connected to organised crime is picked up, there are few prosecutions on serious charges, such as membership of a criminal network.
Police burn cannabis in village of Kurvelesh (Aug 2015)Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Police take care to remain upwind of the smoke from a cannabis bonfire in Kurvelesh
The minister, Saimir Tahiri, says that is not true.
"We haven't chosen to go after villagers who plant small areas to kill their poverty. We go after those who, in our analysis, are 'big fish'. We have nearly 1,600 ongoing criminal proceedings, and we've made more than 400 arrests, which shows we're going after those who finance, organise and gain profit from this business."
There is widespread concern in many quarters in Albania about the wider impact of cannabis production, and how young people - ambitious and impatient for a better life - can be persuaded not to get involved.
"There are too many young people in prison. I think they are victims," says Catholic priest, Father Gjergj Meta.
"Many of them - men and women - are convinced they can make a lot of money. So the cultivation of cannabis doesn't give us a culture of work. People are desperate. They don't see a future."
Father Gjergj penned a letter that was published online, and went viral in Albania. He addressed it to an imaginary youth.
"You may not be able to read this letter," he wrote. "Perhaps you're guarding cannabis in a field, processing it, carrying it in sacks, or maybe you're even in jail…" Then in beautiful prose he described how Albania's troubled history - communism, the cult of strong men, and organised crime - has reduced opportunity. The letter ends with an appeal to young people to turn their backs on the cannabis fields.
With few alternatives, it is a plea that may well fall on deaf ears.
Join the conversation - find us on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
4 December 2016
'I was there when gunmen tried to kill Bob Marley'
4 December 2016
Magazine
Luther Windley
Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Manila at night
Video
Video
Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Manila's brutal nightshift
Hands typing on keyboard
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article The city getting rich from fake news
 
More Videos from the BBC
 How alpacas keep turkey off foxes' menus
How alpacas keep turkey off foxes' menus
 Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Full-size Titanic replica being built in China
BBC News
Full-size Titanic replica being built in China
 Kansas sperm donor to same-sex couple not liable for child support
BBC News
Kansas sperm donor to same-sex couple not liable for child support
 Platypus venom paves way to possible diabetes treatment
BBC News
Platypus venom paves way to possible diabetes treatment
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Welcome to Future Now
BBC Future
Welcome to Future Now
 The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
BBC Future
The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
 11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
BBC Future
11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Dassault Systemes
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever Closer
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever…
Dassault Systemes
Hollywood's Most Famous Couples, Past and Present
Hollywood's Most Famous Couples, Past and Present
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Ranking the 39 Worst Movies From Bad to Really Bad
Ranking the 39 Worst Movies From Bad to Really Bad
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Extreme Sports: Skateboarder May Be Charged After Breaking Speed Limit
Extreme Sports: Skateboarder May Be Charged After…
Muscle & Fitness
High School Ball Player Shows What Sportsmanship Is All About
High School Ball Player Shows What Sportsmanship Is…
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
