BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
selected
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Business
selected
Market Data
Markets
Economy
Companies
Entrepreneurship
Technology of Business
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Carney warns about popular disillusion with capitalism
9 hours ago
 From the section Business
Share
Mark CarneyImage copyrightREUTERS
The Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has warned that people will turn their backs on free and open markets unless something is done to help those left behind by the financial crisis.
In a speech, he said: "Globalisation is associated with low wages, insecure employment, stateless corporations and striking inequalities."
In many advanced economies there are "staggering wealth inequalities," he added.
Mr Carney was speaking in Liverpool.
He told his audience that politicians and central bankers must act to ensure people do not lose faith in the current system.
"Turning our backs on open markets would be a tragedy, but it is a possibility," he said.
"It can only be averted by confronting the underlying reasons for this risk upfront."
Ahmed: Carney says get real, there are losers from free trade
Mr Carney, giving the Roscoe Lecture at Liverpool John Moores University, spoke of the need for wealth distribution and putting individuals back in control.
He cited Prime Minister Theresa May's criticism of "stateless corporations" who paid little tax and had little responsibility to local communities.
The governor said: "Redistribution and fairness also mean turning back the tide of stateless corporations."
"As the prime minister recently stressed, companies must be rooted and pay tax somewhere.
"Businesses operating across borders have responsibilities," he added.
'Challenges to prosperity'
Activists shout slogans as they march during an anti-Trump and anti-TPP protest November 14, 2016 in Washington, DC. Activists held a rally and a march Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
The lecture is only the second major public speech Mr Carney has given since the June Brexit referendum.
Since that vote, the governor has had to defend himself against criticism that he had made explicitly pro-Remain comments, and also against suggestions that the prime minister had been unhappy with the Bank's monetary policy because savers had lost out.
However, although Mr Carney acknowledged in his speech that there were losers from the policy of low interest rates, he said: "The thrifty saver and the rich asset holder are often one and the same."
"Just 2% of households have deposit holdings in excess of £5,000, [they have] few other financial assets, and don't own a home.
"So the vast majority of savers who might have lost some interest income from lower policy rates have stood to gain from increases in asset prices, particularly the recovery in house prices," he added.
The challenges to greater prosperity, he said, were far wider.
Mr Carney listed three priorities:
"Economists must clearly acknowledge the challenges we face, including the realities of uneven gains from trade and technology"
"We must grow our economy by rebalancing the mix of monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural reforms"
"We need to move towards more inclusive growth where everyone has a stake in globalisation."
Andy HaldaneImage copyrightAP
Image caption
Andy Haldane, chief economist at the Bank of England
Last week, the bank's chief economist, Andy Haldane, struck a similar note when he warned about Britain's widening inequality gap.
He was concerned not just with the gap between rich and poor, but also geographically - between north and south, east and west.
Mr Haldane said in a speech: "I think [the issue of regional inequality] is right up there as among the most important issues that we face today as a country."
"What's more, the variations are among the widest in Europe."
Related Topics
UK economy
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Britain's inequality map - stark and growing
2 December 2016
UK manufacturing sector growth 'slows in November'
1 December 2016
Bank governor Mark Carney warns on household debt
30 November 2016
Mark Carney plan for Brexit gets cool response from Gove
27 November 2016
UK third quarter GDP growth confirmed at 0.5%
25 November 2016
Ed Balls: Bank of England independence should be curbed
17 November 2016
Business
A copy of the local Chinese magazine Global People with a cover story that translates to 
Trump in Twitter outburst against China
5 December 2016
 From the section China 437 comments
Full article Trump in Twitter outburst against China
NYSE traders
Dow rises to a fresh record close
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Dow rises to a fresh record close
Greece coins flag
Greek debt burden eased by creditors
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Greek debt burden eased by creditors
 
More Videos from the BBC
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 'We cannot hide from an uncomfortable truth'
'We cannot hide from an uncomfortable truth'
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Kansas sperm donor to same-sex couple not liable for child support
BBC News
Kansas sperm donor to same-sex couple not liable for child support
 Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
BBC News
Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
 Newspaper review: 'Turmoil' in Europe and Queen Scarlett
BBC News
Newspaper review: 'Turmoil' in Europe and Queen Scarlett
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
 The myths and folktales behind Harry Potter
BBC Culture
The myths and folktales behind Harry Potter
 Using school buses to democratise wi-fi
BBC Autos
Using school buses to democratise wi-fi
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
See Which Celebrities Indentify with the GOP
See Which Celebrities Indentify with the GOP
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
World Class Endurance Athlete
World Class Endurance Athlete
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
