BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
ADVERTISEMENT

Chapecoense plane crash: Team awarded Copa Sudamericana

5 hours ago From the section Football
Share this page
 Supporters and family pay tribute to the deceased
Family and supporters have been paying tribute to the players who died in the crash
Brazilian club Chapecoense have been awarded the Copa Sudamericana by South American football confederation Conmebol after most of their team died in a plane crash en route to the final.

Seventy-one people, including 19 players and staff, were killed in last Monday's crash on the way to Colombia for the first leg.

Colombian opponents Atletico Nacional, who asked for Chapecoense to be awarded the trophy, have been given a Fair Play award to acknowledge their "spirit of peace, understanding and fair play".

Chapecoense will be given the $2m (£1.57m) in prize money while Atletico Nacional will receive $1m (£787,000).

Chapecoense vice-president Ivan Tozzo hailed the decision as "justice", telling a news conference on Monday: "We were sure that 'Chape' would be champions. It is a beautiful tribute."


Chapecoense: The day football wept
Fans pay tribute to crash victims
Crash survivor 'may play again'
Chapecoense - a team torn apart
Three Chapecoense players were among six people to survive the crash.

Investigations are continuing into the cause of the accident but a recording suggests the plane was out of fuel moments before the crash outside Medellin.

The small Brazilian city of Chapeco held a massive funeral on Saturday after the victims' coffins arrived home, each draped in the club's green and white flag. While 13,000 people have applied to become club members in the just two days.

Teams from around the world, including the Premier League, paid tribute to the players over the weekend and a minute's silence is scheduled to be held before every Champions League and Europa League game this week.

Brazil's leading football clubs have pledged to loan players to Chapecoense for free and asked for them to be safeguarded from relegation from the top flight for the next three seasons.

Chapecoense were due to play their final league match of the season on Sunday, 11 December, but have now confirmed the fixture will not be played as the outcome does not impact on the championship or relegation.

As Sudamericana champions, Chapecoense get a guaranteed spot in next year's Copa Libertadores, South America's equivalent of the Champions League.

It also means that Chapecoense will face Atletico Nacional - the defending Copa Libertadores champions - in a two-game series next year between the continent's two club champions.

Former Brazil and Barcelona forward Ronaldinho and ex-Argentina international Juan Roman Riquelme have reportedly offered to play for the club, while another former Barca player, Eidur Gudjohnsen, has offered his services.

Brazil will play Colombia in a friendly match at the end of January to help victims of the air crash.
Share this page
Find out more

Match of the Day Facebook

Read more on Match of the Day Facebook
Match of the Day Twitter

Read more on Match of the Day Twitter
BBC Sport Facebook

Read more on BBC Sport Facebook
BBC Sport Twitter

Read more on BBC Sport Twitter
Top Stories

England captain Alastair Cook kisses the Ashes urn
Bayliss expects Cook to captain England in Ashes

9h From the section Cricket
Read more on Bayliss expects Cook to captain England in Ashes
Plymouth
Newport or Plymouth get Liverpool trip in FA Cup third round

4h From the section Football
Read more on Newport or Plymouth get Liverpool trip in FA Cup third round
Paul Stewart and Andy Wodward
Child sex abuse claims - the story so far

10h From the section Football
Read more on Child sex abuse claims - the story so far
ADVERTISEMENT

Related to this story

Fans unite in Brazil for crash victims

2d From the section BBC News
Read more on Chapecoense plane crash: Fans unite for stadium memorial
Colombia plane 'ran out of fuel'

4d From the section BBC News
Read more on Chapecoense air crash: Colombia plane 'ran out of fuel'
Pilot 'opted for no refuel stop'

4d From the section BBC News
Read more on Colombia Chapecoense plane crash: What we know
Chapecoense crash: A team torn apart

4d From the section BBC News
Read more on Chapecoense plane crash: The victims, the survivors and those left behind
Brazilian football club in air disaster

6d From the section BBC News
Read more on Brazil's Chapecoense football team in Colombia plane crash
Premier League Predictor: Play now

6 Aug
Read more on Premier League Predictor: Play now

 
From Around the Web
 Every Clint Eastwood Movie Ranked from Worst to Best
Every Clint Eastwood Movie Ranked from Worst to Best
PrettyFamous
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Check Out This Goalkeeper's Unique Celebration
Check Out This Goalkeeper's Unique Celebration
Muscle and Fitness
These Are the Most Dangerous Countries for Travel
These Are the Most Dangerous Countries for Travel
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
BBC Sport features
Football alerts, newsletters and social media
Get latest scores and headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Gossip column logo
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.
5 live's football daily podcast
Commentaries, clips and podcasts
Enjoy the best debate, analysis and interviews with 5 live and World Service football plus our commentary listings.
Women playing football
How to get into Football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
성서 속의 UFO
무료 eBook 증정 모든 해답은 여기에 미스테리서클 종교 우주인 ET
www.rael.org
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
