BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Magazine
100 Women 2016: The girl who learned in the cloud
2 hours ago
 From the section Magazine
Share
Gouri ChindarkarImage copyrightGOURI CHINDARKAR
100 Women

BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
100 Women 2016: What to look forward to
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
Gouri Chindarkar was among the first group of children in India to experience a unique way of learning. She would go to her village school at dawn to connect with mentors from all over the world. Now a university student, she says her unusual education was "a beautiful journey".
In May 2009 one of the first Soles [Self-Organised Learning Environments, which have now become known as "School in the Cloud"] started up in my school. I was then in 7th Grade, so 13 years old. From the age of six all I had known was the old-style "classroom teaching" and suddenly the Sole shattered this old method and emphasised an interactive approach.
There was a special lab built that had full-length glass walls to help teachers see what was going on, and with lots of space for us to move around, and most importantly the computers connected to the internet which seemed to beckon us. I lived in a small village with few facilities in Maharashtra, and although I had heard of computers and the internet, I had never really used them.
Students in the Sole lab in Gouri's schoolImage copyrightSUNEETA KULKARNI
Image caption
The Sole lab at Gouri's school
The "lessons" mostly took the form of "granny sessions". These are Skype conversations with mentors from all over the world who are not necessarily professional teachers or indeed grandmothers - there have been "grannies" who are government officials, doctors, architects and home makers. They spoke to us about all kinds of things and exposed us to a world far out of reach.
They were more like friends than teachers, and whatever we felt we could express freely with them. They were not expected to teach, but to provoke our curiosity, get us to think, search for answers, and share what we found.
line
100 women BBC season logo
What is 100 women?
BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre.
We want YOU to get involved with your comments, views and ideas. You can find us on: Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat, and YouTube.
Spread the word by sharing your favourite posts and your own stories using #100women
The mediators encouraged us to express ourselves. We were mostly taught in our local language of Marathi so when the sessions first started, we only knew the English alphabet and a few phrases and simple rhymes. We never heard English spoken outside the granny sessions. But the initial fear of a new language gradually reduced. I learned to think, I learned to state my opinion. I understood how to get my views across to another person and I learned to respect the opinion of other people.
Gouri (left) in the Sole, 2009Image copyrightSUNEETA KULKARNI
Image caption
Gouri communicating with one of her "grannies" - Anne Thomas in the US - in 2009
Often we, the children, decided what we wanted to talk about. Because of the time difference I actually used to come to school at 06:30 in the morning (01:00 GMT) to meet Anne Thomas, one of the "grannies" from the US. Some of the sessions took place with Anne while she was holidaying with her family on the beach! I used to spend every holiday in the Sole lab too.
Gouri's house on the outskirts of ShirgaonImage copyrightGOURI CHINDARKAR
Image caption
Gouri's childhood home on the outskirts of Shirgaon - she had heard of computers but not used them
I absorbed knowledge in the best possible way because I was not "taught" it. Instead I experienced it. Even at that age I was able to decide what I wanted to do. Otherwise I would have been like other children, waiting for school results and then leaving life decisions to that.
Grades and knowledge are two different things. Following the syllabus can help achieve grades, but it's the other activities - such as independently investigating a question - that provide practical knowledge and that is even more important than grades. Marks are only a medium to make you eligible for a certain criteria, but knowledge makes you more confident. In a traditional teaching environment, real learning can fall behind in the race to achieve grades.
One's behaviour and thoughts are naturally impacted by one's environment. Sole gave us one really important thing. And that is freedom. Sole broke through the equation that the maths class in the timetable is meant only for maths.
Instead of being given ready-made answers to questions, we learned the special joy of searching for oneself and finding much more than we had expected. We got into the habit of searching for and trying out new stuff. Sessions were never unidirectional, but gloriously interactive. They could be about Indian culture and traditions or about really small things including poems.
Gouri ChindarkarImage copyrightGOURI CHINDARKAR
Image caption
Gouri says she was encouraged to be curious about the world
Even today I am in touch with several of the SOLE mediators. Rodger from Australia is one of them. We remain connected through Facebook and WhatsApp. I can share anything with him. Even today he enables me to come up with solutions for various situations.
Now I am working on my Bachelor's degree in Computer Engineering at the SSPM's College of Engineering in Kankavali, part of Mumbai University. I hope to get a job as a web developer.
The Sole was a beautiful journey. It continues today. This journey taught me to learn, to make mistakes, and rectify them and start again.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Who were the BBC's 100 Women of 2015?
17 November 2015
Who were the 100 Women in 2014?
26 October 2014
Who were the 100 Women in 2013?
22 November 2013
100 Women

BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
21 November 2016
100 Women 2016: What to look forward to
21 November 2016
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
21 November 2016
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
21 November 2016
Video Winnie Harlow: 'My skin doesn't define me'
21 November 2016
Magazine
Paula Hawkins
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
21 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article 100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
Mandy Littlewood
My kidneys have failed, and I know my kids face the same fate
21 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article My kidneys have failed, and I know my kids face the same fate
Memunatu Turay outside her home in Freetown
My quarrel with a proud FGM cutter
20 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article My quarrel with a proud FGM cutter
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Japan Tsunami warning: 'Evacuate immediately'
Japan Tsunami warning: 'Evacuate immediately'
 BBC 100 Women: What is working life like for UK women today?
BBC 100 Women: What is working life like for UK women today?
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Haverhill Atterton and Ellis building fire: Investigation under way
Haverhill Atterton and Ellis building fire: Investigation under way
 Heavy rain and strong winds cause flooding in Mossley
Heavy rain and strong winds cause flooding in Mossley
 Parental alienation: 'I was manipulated by my father'
Parental alienation: 'I was manipulated by my father'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Yellowstone Park accident victim dissolved in boiling acidic pool
BBC News
Yellowstone Park accident victim dissolved in boiling acidic pool
 US police officers shot in four attacks in one day
BBC News
US police officers shot in four attacks in one day
 Driver drags woman by neck in German town of Hamelin
BBC News
Driver drags woman by neck in German town of Hamelin
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Driving the 'invincible' Tesla Model X
BBC Autos
Driving the 'invincible' Tesla Model X
 This is the electric Jaguar
BBC Autos
This is the electric Jaguar
 The Los Angeles auto show in 90 seconds
BBC Autos
The Los Angeles auto show in 90 seconds
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
42 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3 minutes ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
5
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
8
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
9
The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
10
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
 
From Around the Web
 25 Celebrities That Vote Red
25 Celebrities That Vote Red
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Poorest Countries in the World
The Poorest Countries in the World
country-facts.findthedata.com
Ranked: The 100 Richest Members of Congress
Ranked: The 100 Richest Members of Congress
InsideGov | By Graphiq
These Are The Best Western Movies of All Time
These Are The Best Western Movies of All Time
PrettyFamous
How he learned 9 languages fluently
How he learned 9 languages fluently
Babbel
Finally You Can Track Your Car Using Your Smartphone!
Finally You Can Track Your Car Using Your…
SMART DEVICE TRENDS
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
Instant Grammar Checker
Grammarly Makes Sure Everything You Type Is Effective And Mistake-Free. Try Now!
grammarly.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
