
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
Australia
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
selected
US & Canada
IS conflict: How is it getting hold of weapons from the West?
By Gordon Corera
Security correspondent, BBC News, northern Iraq
5 hours ago
 From the section Middle East Related TopicsSyrian civil war
Share
James Bevan (left) and Gordon Corera
Image caption
Munitions have markings which help identify where they came from
Islamic State

Battle for Mosul: The story so far
Islamic State group: The full story
Is so-called Islamic State finished?
Islamic State and the crisis in Iraq and Syria in maps
Weapons meant for Western-backed rebels in Syria are ending up in the hands of so-called Islamic State in neighbouring Iraq - but how are they getting there?
James Bevan and his small team step carefully into a residential house in Qaraqosh, not far from Mosul in Iraq.
A long trail of blood by the entrance and near-ready suicide vests just inside the door confirm what they have been told by a local militia group - this was a position used by fighters from so-called Islamic State (IS).
The team are from the group Conflict Armament Research (CAR). The investigators carry only notebooks and cameras as they hunt for evidence.
Bedding, clothes and remnants of life from the family that once lived there litter the house. But in a backroom, they find what they are after - empty boxes of ammunition.
They shout out details as they take notes and photos. Their aim is to understand how weapons get into the wrong hands.
"To date, the international community has been blind to the fact that weapons are being diverted into conflict affected areas," Mr Bevan explains.

Media captionJames Bevan of Conflict Armament Research traces IS weapons
The team work just behind the frontlines in areas recently captured from IS. Munitions can be examined for markings but the empty boxes are the most useful, since they carry serial numbers and batch numbers.
These will be then fed into a database as they trace how the material got from the factory where it was manufactured into the middle of a conflict zone.
Bomb-making 'recipe'
Qaraqosh, a predominantly Christian town, is a scene of near-apocalyptic devastation - buildings smashed to pieces, craters in roads, church steeples toppled over.
The streets are eerily quiet. All the residents left when IS came. IS was pushed out only at the end of last month as part of the offensive on Mosul.
By day, a local Christian militia patrols the town but word is that, at night, IS fighters sometimes return.
Iraqi soldier near weapons collected after IS was defeated in Falluja (file photo)Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Iraqi forces have found huge arms caches in places retaken from IS
As we visit a church, three former worshippers arrive for a brief visit. They recount the exact moment they held their last service inside the building - 16:00 on 6 August, 2014.
After that they fled to Irbil and have returned briefly to see what remains.
Pictures around the altar have been torn down and the building ransacked. Inside the church's hall, the CAR team find evidence that the site has also been used as an IS weapons factory.
The parts for rockets are scattered across the floor. Lying next to a bowl of chemicals is a handwritten "recipe" to mix explosives.
IS tried to mass-produce weaponry in areas it controlled and set up home-made mortar factories, but there is also evidence of materials that have come from abroad.
Mass purchases
Around the church pews are bags of industrial chemical - the CAR team have seen these before. It is sold purely on the domestic market in Turkey but large quantities made it into IS hands.
"When we look at improvised weapons and homemade explosives, we know they buy in massive bulk and they buy primarily on the Turkish market," says Mr Bevan.
"Their procurement networks reach out into southern Turkey and they obviously have a series of very strong relationships with very big distributors."
Trucks at Turkey-Syria crossing (file photo)Image copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Weapons and armaments are brought into Syria from Turkey
In some cases CAR have recovered evidence of between 3-5,000 bags being bought with the same lot number.
"Someone has gone up and bought half the stock of a factory," he says.
IS has had no problem arming itself - and the work of CAR suggests that this may partly have been thanks to the weapons sent into the conflict zone by those fighting it.
Turkey conduit
The arms trade is a murky world but Mr Bevan's team has found evidence on the source of IS ammunition.
In the early phase of the conflict, most of it was captured on the battlefield from Iraqi and Syrian forces. But from the end of 2015, the team started to see another significant source.
Ammunition boxes were turning up that could be traced back to factories in Eastern Europe.
The team approached manufacturing states to request information to find out to whom the material was sold.
Map showing different areas of control in Iraq and SyriaImage copyrightEPA
It emerged that the material had been sold - legally - to the governments of the United States and Saudi Arabia. It was then shipped through Turkey.
The destination was northern Syria and the opposition groups (which the US and Saudi Arabia supported) fighting President Bashar al-Assad.
The intention was never for the ammunition to find its way to IS but somewhere along the way it was diverted.
This ammunition was found in Tikrit, Ramadi, Falluja and now Mosul - all places where it has been used to fight the US-backed Iraqi forces.
The speed with which IS was getting this material was startling - sometimes only two months from leaving the factory.
"If you supply weapons and ammunition not only to non-state actors but to non-state actors in a very complex interlocked conflict then the risk of diversion is very, very high," says Mr Bevan.
Stemming the flow
Perhaps the closest parallel to the problems of covert weapons supply and diversion is the support given by the US and others to the mujahideen fighting the Soviet Union in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
In that case, weapons were sent to certain groups approved by the CIA but were funnelled through Pakistan's intelligence service and sometimes found their way into the hands of other groups fighting the Soviet Union who had more extreme agendas, among them Osama Bin Laden.
IS fighters in Raqqa (file photo)Image copyrightAP
Image caption
IS is somehow getting weapons intended for rebels fighting President Assad
The current situation is even more complex and confusing than in Afghanistan - with two overlapping conflicts in Iraq and Syria and an even wider range of countries supporting proxy groups.
Mr Bevan believes establishing the route of weapons is the first stage to preventing diversion.
"We are able to go back to the manufacturer and say these are your weapons and we know that you transferred them legally but your export recipient has transferred them here without authorisation. So you have a problem and now you need to do something about it."
The evidence of the destruction wreaked by weapons lies everywhere in Iraq and Syria. Trying to restrict the flow will not be easy so long as outside states are supporting their own proxy groups.
And in the chaos of this conflict there is no guarantee who will end up getting their hands on weapons and how they will use them.
Related Topics
Islamic State groupSyrian civil war
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Islamic State

Battle for Mosul: The story so far
19 November 2016
Islamic State group: The full story
20 June 2016
Is so-called Islamic State finished?
5 October 2016
Islamic State and the crisis in Iraq and Syria in maps
2 November 2016
Why is Dabiq so important for IS?
4 October 2016
Syria rebels set up camp for IS defectors
12 October 2016
Why so-called Islamic State chooses to bomb during Ramadan
5 July 2016
Turkey v Syria's Kurds v Islamic State
23 August 2016
Who is Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi?
8 March 2016
Islamic State: What is the attraction for young Europeans?
8 March 2016
Iraq divisions undermine IS fight
5 February 2016
Counting the cost of air strikes on IS
4 February 2016
Inside the Islamic State kidnap machine
22 September 2015
Islamic State: Where key countries stand
3 December 2015
Profiles

What is the Khorasan Group?
24 September 2014
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: Islamic State's driving force
31 July 2014
Backgrounders

Islamic State: The struggle to stay rich
8 March 2016
The rise of jihadists in Iraq and Syria
3 October 2014
Isis: A thoroughly modern caliphate
11 July 2014
Who are the Kurds?
14 March 2016
Video

Video Who's in charge of IS? In 90 secs
4 March 2016
Video How so-called Islamic State started - In 3 minutes
9 March 2016
Middle East
Relatives mourn 15-year-old Ziad Rihani, who was killed by shellfire in the besieged rebel-held Douma district of Damascus, Syria (14 November 2016)
Almost 1m under siege in Syria - UN
21 November 2016
From the section Middle East
Full article Almost 1m under siege in Syria - UN
Map of Libya
'Monkey' sparks fierce battle in Libya
21 November 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article 'Monkey' sparks fierce battle in Libya
A man walks over the remains of a building destroyed by fighting in Taiz, Yemen (20 November 2016)
No extension to 48-hour truce in Yemen
21 November 2016
From the section Middle East
Full article No extension to 48-hour truce in Yemen
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
 CBI Chief: We want to make the best of Brexit
CBI Chief: We want to make the best of Brexit
 Secret filming uncovers charity shop's anti-Islamic stock
Secret filming uncovers charity shop's anti-Islamic stock
 The street-to-street battles for Mosul
The street-to-street battles for Mosul
 Muslim woman: 'Why I backed Donald Trump for president'
Muslim woman: 'Why I backed Donald Trump for president'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Parental alienation: 'I was manipulated by my father'
BBC News
Parental alienation: 'I was manipulated by my father'
 Andy Woodward sexual abuse story prompts more police contact
BBC News
Andy Woodward sexual abuse story prompts more police contact
 Arvind Kejriwal: The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
BBC News
Arvind Kejriwal: The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
BBC Culture
The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
 A Sunday ritual for 300,000 women
BBC Travel
A Sunday ritual for 300,000 women
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
47 minutes ago
Earthquake sparks Japan tsunami advisory
1 hour ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
6
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
7
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
10
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
 
From Around the Web
 Say Goodbye to These Names, They're Going Extinct
Say Goodbye to These Names, They're Going…
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
16 Hypoallergenic Dogs That Won't Make You Sneeze
16 Hypoallergenic Dogs That Won't Make You Sneeze
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
These Are the Most Unreliable Quarterbacks in NFL History
These Are the Most Unreliable Quarterbacks in…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Budget carrier Peach to add fuel-saving Airbus A320neo
Budget carrier Peach to add fuel-saving Airbus…
Nikkei Asian Review
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Most Popular Names Among Doctors
The Most Popular Names Among Doctors
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
