
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Corporate growth still driving deforestation, CDP shows
By Mark Kinver
Environment reporter, BBC News
5 December 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Felled forest (Getty Images)Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The removal of the world's tree cover remains a concern but deforestation rates are slowing, according to the United Nations
Although progress is being made, up to US $906bn of company turnover is still tied to global deforestation, an assessment has concluded.
A study by the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) suggests almost a quarter of company revenues depend on deforestation-linked commodities.
These commodities are cattle products, soy, palm oil and timber products.
The findings are based on disclosures from 365 investors worth US $22 trillion (£17 trillion).
"We found this year that a substantial share of corporate income depends upon commodities that are linked to deforestation risk," explained Katie McCoy, CDP's head of forests.
"When we carried out our analysis, we found that - on average - about a quarter of companies' revenue are dependent on commodities that have been linked to deforestation."
She said there was a clear message for companies to take the issue of deforestation in their supply chain very seriously.
"It is having an impact on their potential to generate revenue."
Deforestation concerns
Ms McCoy added: "Another key message that is coming though is that while companies are confident that they have a secure and sustainable supply of these commodities, our analysis suggests that companies are overlooking how deforestation impacts are going to affect their growth.
"In this era of increased scrutiny, we are asking companies in order to capitalise on opportunity and minimise risk, they really need to engage more meaningfully with their supply chain and, in some cases, move deforestation risk into the boardroom."
She said that taking "deforestation into the boardroom" would help shift the paradigm into a long-term issue, making it more sustainable."
At present, a third of companies that responded to CDP's request for information said that the issue of deforestation was not being discussed at boardroom level.
"[It] affects the way risk assessments in the company are conducted, making sure that this issue is part of the mix."
She added that that by increasing levels of transparency and disclosure from their suppliers would be beneficial.
"This means recognising that the biggest risks and opportunities are to be found in the supply chain, and we would ask companies to disclose the relevant information, and also to collaborate with those suppliers to implement change," she told BBC News.
"Finally, we are asking companies to work sectorally. This is where the boardroom level and working with the supply chain comes in.
"So they are working with "peer companies" across the sector. We are also asking them to also work with customers, governments and civil society as well, because there needs to be an enabling environment in order for companies to deliver."
The assessment by the CDP found that regulatory signals in landmark agreements such as the Paris Agreement placed decarbonisation of economic and financial activity, and that a sustainable post 2020 economy relied on the shift away from deforestation.
"Companies are moving forward, the manufacturers and retailers that have reported that they are working with their suppliers and that they have far greater levels of traceability and they are more significantly more like to identify supply chain related opportunities,"
Ms McCoy added that she was hopeful that the corporate world was heading in the right direction.
She said: "On a more positive note, we have never seen transparency be more important and have companies actively asking for transparency, and we are pleased that more investors are signing up to our programme.
"Since last year, we have had 20% more investors interested in this issue. I am encouraged about how many companies are seeing the value in being transparent about how they tackle this issue."
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Forests are 'key feature' of food security landscape
6 May 2015
UN: World's forests fundamental to human well-being
23 June 2014
UN report: 'Decisive year' for world's forestry
7 September 2015
UN urges action to protect forests' genetic diversity
5 June 2014
Locals 'can play key role in helping forests recover'
7 November 2011
Trees: More than just carbon sinks
19 March 2009
Related Internet links

FAO
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
 
More Videos from the BBC
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
 Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
 One-minute World News
One-minute World News
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
 China's hi-tech bike hire startups
China's hi-tech bike hire startups
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Ghostbusters librarian actress Alice Drummond dies aged 88
BBC News
Ghostbusters librarian actress Alice Drummond dies aged 88
 John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
BBC News
John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
 Stray goat goes wild at Carrickfergus shop
BBC News
Stray goat goes wild at Carrickfergus shop
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The power of a beam of light
BBC Culture
The power of a beam of light
 What history’s love letters reveal
BBC Culture
What history’s love letters reveal
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
9 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
First Names Destined for Doctors
First Names Destined for Doctors
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
U.S. Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
InsideGov | By Graphiq
These Countries Are Poorer Than Everyone Else
These Countries Are Poorer Than Everyone Else
country-facts.findthedata.com
Cigarette Costs Since the Year You Were Born
Cigarette Costs Since the Year You Were Born
Consumer Price Index (CPI) - Inflation Calculator and Rates
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
고음질 전용 블루투스리시버
SLASH-R, 고성능 DAC 사용. 하이파이에 스마트폰 무선 연결
interpark.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
