BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Magazine
Darryl Jones: The unknown Stone
By Brian Wheeler
BBC News, Washington DC
30 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Share
Keith Richards and Darryl JonesImage copyrightREUTERS
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
The city getting rich from fake news
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
As The Rolling Stones prepare to release an album paying homage to the black blues musicians who inspired them, is it time their long-serving black bass player won more recognition?
Darryl Jones has been with The Rolling Stones for more than two decades now but never appears in official band photographs.
He has played on just about everything they have recorded since 1994, including the band's new album, Blue and Lonesome, and is an integral part of their live show.
But when the time comes to take a bow, Jones often melts into the background with the other members of the Stones' touring band.
The four core members - Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Charlie Watts and Ronnie Wood - always take centre stage.
Does the bass player, an American roughly two decades younger than his British band mates, still feel like the new boy?
"I don't think that really ever goes away," he says, laughing.
"In terms of the membership of this very small and exclusive club I guess I'll always be like the new guy. In terms of playing with the band, though, I feel like a bit of an old hand now."
The Rolling StonesImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Jones was not the obvious choice to replace original member Bill Wyman, who quit the band acrimoniously after 31 years, saying he was fed-up with touring.
A highly-rated jazz player, who cut his teeth with Miles Davis, he confessed in early interviews that he had not listened to much of the Stones' music prior to joining them.
But at the auditions he bonded with Charlie Watts, a fellow jazz man, and his easygoing personality enabled him to take his place within the Stones operation without upsetting the delicate balance of egos at its core.
Darryl Jones
Started his career as a studio musician in New York before joining jazz legend Miles Davis' band in 1983
Now 54 years old, he became the Rolling Stones' bass player in 1994
Has appeared on every Stones album since 1994's Voodoo Lounge, including Stripped (1995), Bridges to Babylon (1997), No Security (1998), A Bigger Bang (2005) and 2016's Blue and Lonesome
Has also played with Sting, Madonna, Eric Clapton and blues/funk band The Stone Raiders
The question of when he was going to be made a "full member" was there from the start.
Asked about it in a 1994 interview, Keith Richards said: "We'll kind of see how it works, but as far as I'm concerned personally, and the boys in the band, if you're on stage with us, you're a Rolling Stone, and that's all there is to it."
Richards is generous in his praise for his onstage sparring partner in a new documentary currently in production, Darryl Jones: Like A Rolling Stone, describing the bass player as "my solid left arm".
"I look upon him as my big brother now, even though I am older than him," he says, with a throaty cackle.
Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Glastonbury 2013Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
But Jones remains a hired hand - much the same as Ronnie Wood was when he officially joined the band in 1976, as a replacement for guitarist Mick Taylor.
It took the former Faces man more than a decade on wages before he was bumped up to full membership and an equal share of the profits.
After more than 50 years together, the Rolling Stones remain one of the biggest live acts in the world - their last three outings, including this year's Zip Code tour, with its groundbreaking stop in Cuba, have raked in a total of $401m (£321m) in ticket sales, according to Billboard.
The Rolling Stones arrive in Havana in MarchImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The Rolling Stones arrive in Havana in March
Has Jones ever had any discussions with the band about becoming a full member?
"It has not really come up very often," he says.
There is the Rolling Stones as a musical unit and there is the Rolling Stones as a brand
Mat Snow, Music journalist
"Obviously that would be a really wonderful thing for a person like me. I have been a sideman for more than 30 years now.
"I think most musicians, somewhere deep down inside, even if they are sidemen, or if they are hired players, there is a desire to be in a band. And I would not be being completely honest if I said that it would not be wonderful, it would not be amazing, to be considered and, you know, jump into this organisation as a full member.
"But that is not a decision I am in a position to make."

Media captionThe Rolling Stones talk about bass player Darryl Jones
Jones adds that he would not be party to any discussions about membership and the issue has no bearing on his commitment to the music.
"I just play the best that I can and the rest of it I don't have any control over."
He declines to reveal how much he is paid.
Darryl Jones is not the first Rolling Stones musician to have been kept firmly in the background.
Keyboard player Ian Stewart, who died in 1985, was with them from the start but his "square" look did not fit with the image manager Andrew Loog Oldham was trying to create for the band in the 1960s.
Rolling Stones in 1963Image copyrightARCHIVE PHOTOS
Image caption
Keyboard player Ian Stewart (far left) was with the Rolling Stones from the start
White line 10 pixels
The Rolling Stones in 1964Image copyrightEVENING STANDARD
Image caption
By 1964 Stewart had been sidelined in publicity photos
"He was kept on the sidelines because he didn't look the part," says music journalist and veteran Stones watcher Mat Snow.
"Everybody knew he was in the band. The band knew he was in the band. But he didn't appear in publicity pictures.
"There is the Rolling Stones as a musical unit and there is the Rolling Stones as a brand."
I live in a world of white supremacy, basically
Darryl Jones, Rolling Stones bass player
In Snow's view it's ironic that Jones remains the "sole regular black member" of a band that has always played black music. But he argues Jones does not fit the Stones' brand as well as Ronnie Wood, who was part of the same 60s London blues scene "even if he wasn't part of the original inner gang".
Paul Trynka, author of a recent biography of the late Stones founder Brian Jones, also says it is "strange" that Darryl Jones doesn't participate in photo shoots.
But, he goes on: "It seems to me what they are trying to do is keep a very strict demarcation. 'Here are the Stones, we own the brand, here is this fellow, he plays bass, he's not a part of the brand of the Stones.'
"There is this tradition in black R&B music that people just hire somebody for a certain amount of time."
The Rolling Stones have always been careful to acknowledge their debt to the blues musicians who inspired them as young men.
Howlin WolfImage copyrightHULTON ARCHIVE
Image caption
Howlin Wolf was among those to capitalise on the British blues boom
There was something about the music of downtrodden black Americans who had migrated north to Chicago in search of work that spoke to the teenage Jagger and Richards, in their bedrooms in suburban Dartford.
The music had fallen out of favour with black audiences in America, who preferred the more upbeat and aspirational sounds of Motown and James Brown. But the Stones and their tight circle of fellow blues purists - centred initially on The Station Hotel in Richmond, and Eel Pie Island in the Thames - sparked a global revival of the form, handing second careers to black blues artists like Muddy Waters and Howlin Woolf.
The 12 songs on their new album, all drawn from the 1950s Chicago blues scene, would have been a "set list" for The Stones in the early 1960s, before they started writing "pop songs", Keith Richards recently told Jones, as they listened back to the new record in Richards' hotel room.
"They have never really moved far away from that," says Jones, who is from Chicago and was briefly a part of the city's blues scene. "They have made a lifelong study of this music."
The Rolling StonesImage copyrightREUTERS
Jones has always pursued side projects in addition to his work with the Stones. He is currently working on a solo album and, as a singer and songwriter, he feels he has something to say "about the state of things, as the world is today".
His parents were part of the Black Panther movement in the 1960s and taught him "to be very proud to be a young black man", he says.
Now, as an older black man in modern America, he says, taking a few seconds to find the right words, "I live in a world of white supremacy, basically."
But, he adds, "at the same time I have the kind of attitude that I was taught by my parents that a person is not judged by their colour, a person is judged by their character.
"And so when I look at the Rolling Stones and the music they are playing I am not so segregated about it. These guys can play blues as well as anybody I have played blues with so, for me, that is the main point."
As a small boy in Chicago, he can clearly recall hearing The Beatles and The Rolling Stones for the first time on an "all-black" radio station.
His ambition back then was to "play with the best bands, with the best artists" - and in the idiom of blues and rock and roll, he says, the Rolling Stones are "high on that list".
Join the conversation - find us on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
4 December 2016
'I was there when gunmen tried to kill Bob Marley'
4 December 2016
Magazine
Luther Windley
Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Manila at night
Video
Video
Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Manila's brutal nightshift
Hands typing on keyboard
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article The city getting rich from fake news
 
More Videos from the BBC
 What is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
What is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
 Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
 'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
 Heinz baked beans advert banned
Heinz baked beans advert banned
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
BBC News
Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
 Islamic State group claims Ohio State University rampage
BBC News
Islamic State group claims Ohio State University rampage
 Mars probe returns first pictures
BBC News
Mars probe returns first pictures
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Is it rude to recline your seat?
BBC Autos
Is it rude to recline your seat?
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 These Are the Biggest Legends in the Rock Hall of Fame
These Are the Biggest Legends in the Rock Hall of…
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
The Best-Selling Album Every Year Since 1956
The Best-Selling Album Every Year Since 1956
PrettyFamous
50 Baby Names With the Most Musical Potential
50 Baby Names With the Most Musical Potential
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Heavy Metal Muscle
Heavy Metal Muscle
Muscle & Fitness
Fast and Furious Workout Playlist
Fast and Furious Workout Playlist
Men's Fitness
Kevin Hart's Alter-Ego 'Chocolate Droppa' Releases His New Single, 'Baller Alert'
Kevin Hart's Alter-Ego 'Chocolate Droppa' Releases…
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
