BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
By James Gallagher
Health and science reporter, BBC News website
3 hours ago
 From the section Health
Share
elderly couple holding handsImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
There is growing evidence that the dementia crisis may not be as bad as first feared, say researchers.
A study suggests the proportion of elderly people developing dementia is falling in the US - backing up similar findings in the UK and Europe.
Data from 21,057 people over the age of 65 in the US showed the proportion with dementia fell from 11.6% in 2000 to 8.8% in 2012.
The findings were published in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine.
There is a suggestion that higher levels of education are protecting the brain from the disease.
One expert said the results were "incredibly important for the world".
Similar studies in Europe, published in the Lancet Neurology last year, suggested dementia rates had fallen in the UK and among Spanish men and had stabilised in other European countries.
Brain protection
Prof Kenneth Langa, who conducted the latest study at the University of Michigan, said: "Our results add to a growing body of evidence that this decline in dementia risk is a real phenomenon, and that the expected future growth in the burden of dementia may not be as extensive as once thought."
The slow decline in brain function is irreversible - there are no drugs or treatments - so finding ways of preventing the condition is hugely important.
Education has long been suspected to play a role, and the study found that while the dementia rate fell, the average time older adults had spent in school or university increased from 11.8 years in 2000 to 12.7 years in 2012.
It is possible that the mental challenge of education helps protect brain cells from dying later in life, or that once neurons start to die, education helps the rest of the brain rewire and compensate to prevent the symptoms of dementia appearing.
Old manImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Good physical health is also thought to help protect the brain.
However, the study showed levels of diabetes, obesity and high blood pressure all increased between 2000 and 2012.
It is possible that better medication dampened their negative impact.
Prof Carol Brayne, who conducted the European analysis and is from the University of Cambridge, said the US study added "strong further evidence" that rates were declining in some countries.
She said education appeared to be significant and that people with higher levels of education seemed to "defer" dementia until later in life.
She told the BBC News website: "These findings are incredibly important for the world and underlie the importance of access to education.
"But it is likely to be a combination of risk factors - better health from conception, vaccinations, access to education, medical care, not smoking - that taken together will have an impact."
Prof Brayne added that identifying what could help stave off dementia would ensure "we don't go backwards, otherwise the gains we've had won't be had by future generations".
Biggest killer
However, the number of people affected could still soar. The falling rate could be overwhelmed by the rising numbers of people living into old age.
Despite a falling dementia rate, the disease still became the biggest killer in England and Wales last year.
There are also fewer people dying from other diseases, as well as changes to the way deaths are being recorded that move dementia up the rankings.
Hilary Evans, the chief executive of Alzheimer's Research UK, said the latest study was a cause for "optimism" but dementia remained the "greatest medical challenge".
He said: "While these findings present a positive picture, we must not forget that there are still huge numbers of people living with dementia.
"This useful study adds to emerging evidence suggesting that dementia prevalence may be either declining or stabilising in parts of Western Europe and the US, but there are still many unanswered questions.
"We need to understand what is driving this apparent change in dementia risk if we are to harness this knowledge to provide crucial public health advice."
Drs Ozioma Okonkwo and Sanjay Asthana, from the University of Wisconsin, said: "The growing consistency of reports indicating a potential decrease in its prevalence is encouraging.
"The focus now should be on better understanding the factors that underlie this trend and translating that knowledge into interventions that can reduce the risk of dementia for both individuals and society as a whole."
Follow James on Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Dementia levels 'are stabilising'
21 August 2015
Being overweight 'reduces dementia risk'
10 April 2015
Health
Ana Beatriz, a baby girl with microcephaly, celebrates her first fourth months of life in Lagoa do Carro, Pernambuco, Brazil, on 8 February 2016.
WHO declares Zika emergency over
18 November 2016
 From the section World
Full article WHO declares Zika emergency over
Salad
Bagged salad is 'Salmonella risk'
18 November 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Bagged salad is 'Salmonella risk'
How bodies could be frozen and preserved n the future
Dying teen won ruling to preserve body
18 November 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Dying teen won ruling to preserve body
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'Huge potential' for suppliers across north Wales
'Huge potential' for suppliers across north Wales
 Muslim woman: 'Why I backed Donald Trump for president'
Muslim woman: 'Why I backed Donald Trump for president'
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Why one Pennsylvania county voted Trump
Why one Pennsylvania county voted Trump
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 Japan Tsunami warning: 'Evacuate immediately'
Japan Tsunami warning: 'Evacuate immediately'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Wales no longer significantly underfunded, Holtham says
BBC News
Wales no longer significantly underfunded, Holtham says
 Bristol Temple Meads railway station shut by flash flooding
BBC News
Bristol Temple Meads railway station shut by flash flooding
 Dolgellau schools plan prompts campaign by parents
BBC News
Dolgellau schools plan prompts campaign by parents
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 A Sunday ritual for 300,000 women
BBC Travel
A Sunday ritual for 300,000 women
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
9 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
10
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
 
From Around the Web
 South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to remove Park
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to…
Nikkei Asian Review
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Presidents with the Lowest IQs
The Presidents with the Lowest IQs
InsideGov | By Graphiq
These Are The Best Western Movies of All Time
These Are The Best Western Movies of All Time
PrettyFamous
Every Tom Hanks Movie Ranked
Every Tom Hanks Movie Ranked
PrettyFamous
How he learned 9 languages fluently
How he learned 9 languages fluently
Babbel
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
