BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
Australia
selected
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
US & Canada
Platypus venom paves way to possible diabetes treatment
30 November 2016
 From the section Australia
Share
This File picture taken on 28 March 2003 shows the world's first twin baby platypuses born in captivity, at Taronga Zoo in Sydney.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Scientists can now synthesise the chemical so do not need to catch more platypuses
Platypus venom could pave the way for new treatments for type 2 diabetes, say Australian researchers.
The males of the extraordinary semi-aquatic mammal - one of the only kind to lay eggs - have venomous spurs on the heels of their hind feet.
The poison is used to ward off adversaries.
But scientists at the University of Adelaide and Flinders University have discovered it contains a hormone that could help treat diabetes.
Known as GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide-1), it is also found in humans and other animals, where it promotes insulin release, lowering blood glucose levels. But it normally degrades very quickly.
Not for the duck-billed bottom feeders though. Or for echidnas, also known as spiny anteaters - another iconic Australian species found to carry the unusual hormone.
Both produce a long-lasting form of it, offering the tantalising prospect of creating something similar for human diabetes sufferers.
In this photo illustration, a teaspoon of sugar is seen on 8 April 2016 in Melbourne, Australia.Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Insulin regulates blood sugar levels and is either insufficient in diabetics or their bodies do not react properly to it
Lead researcher Prof Frank Grutzer told the BBC's Greg Dunlop why the researchers had decided to look at the platypus and its insulin mechanisms: "We knew from genome analysis that there was something weird about the platypus's metabolic control system because they basically lack a functional stomach."
They are not the only animals to use insulin against enemies. The gila monster, a venomous lizard native to the US and Mexico, and the geographer cone, a dangerous sea snail which can kill entire schools of fish by releasing insulin into the sea, both also weaponise the chemical.
"That's obviously something that can be powerful in venom," Prof Grutzer said, though he stressed it was not what had led them to the discovery. "It was really coincidental," he said.
A baby platypus being held in a towel before being transferred back to it's burrow after emerging for the first time on 16 February 2006 at Sydney's Taronga Zoo.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
The mammal is often dubbed the oddest in the animal kingdom
He emphasised that much more research was needed before the discovery could, if ever, lead to a human treatment: "An important experiment is going to be putting this it into mice and see how it affects blood glucose levels. That's certainly very high on our priority list.
"But to get to a drug is a very long journey. We still have to learn a lot more about how this platypus hormone actually works."
Related Topics
Animals
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

The drugs derived from deadly poisons
18 October 2013
'Platypus-zilla' fossil unearthed in Australia
4 November 2013
How a cone snail catches its prey
31 December 2011
Lizard hormone diabetes drug hope
8 September 2004
Australia
Australia flag flip flip
Alternative Australia Day event banned
5 December 2016
 From the section Australia
Full article Alternative Australia Day event banned
England captain Alastair Cook kisses the Ashes urn
SPORT Bayliss expects Cook to lead Ashes bid
5 December 2016
 From the section Cricket
Full article Bayliss expects Cook to lead Ashes bid
Deng Adut, 2017 NSW Australian of the Year
Ex-child soldier vies for Australian award
5 December 2016
 From the section Australia
Full article Ex-child soldier vies for Australian award
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
 Can Trump outlaw gay marriage?
Can Trump outlaw gay marriage?
 Fish are 'intelligent and emotional'
Fish are 'intelligent and emotional'
 'Anti-homeless' slope installed in Liverpool doorway
'Anti-homeless' slope installed in Liverpool doorway
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 English-speaking Cameroonians protest against French
English-speaking Cameroonians protest against French
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Prince Alwaleed says women driving ban hurts Saudi economy
BBC News
Prince Alwaleed says women driving ban hurts Saudi economy
 Barbados at 50: Home of Rihanna, cricket and coucou
BBC News
Barbados at 50: Home of Rihanna, cricket and coucou
 The revolutionary city that revived Indian pride
BBC News
The revolutionary city that revived Indian pride
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
BBC Future
Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
 The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
BBC Autos
The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
 The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
BBC Future
The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Ranked: The 50 Best Movies in History
Ranked: The 50 Best Movies in History
PrettyFamous
These Are the 50 Most Famous Deceased Actors
These Are the 50 Most Famous Deceased Actors
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
25 Italian Baby Names You'll Want to Steal
25 Italian Baby Names You'll Want to Steal
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Naming Every MLB Team's Worst Player of 2016
Naming Every MLB Team's Worst Player of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
