BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
US & Canada
selected
Al Gore meets Donald Trump and Ivanka for climate talks
5 hours ago
 From the section US & Canada
Share
Al Gore on an elevatorImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Mr Gore arrived alone to Trump Tower and did not speak to the media before his meeting
Former Vice President Al Gore has met President-elect Donald Trump and his daughter Ivanka Trump to discuss climate policy.
The meeting "was a sincere search for areas of common ground," said Mr Gore, a climate change activist.
During his presidential campaign, Mr Trump called man-made climate change a "hoax" perpetuated by China.
His daughter Ivanka reportedly wants to make the subject one of her signature issues.
It is unclear what role she will have in her father's administration, but he had said that his children would take over his global business interests.
All three of Mr Trump's adult children are serving on his transition team.
Why Al Gore? - Anthony Zurcher, BBC News, Washington
Anyone who had Donald Trump sitting down with former Vice-President Al Gore among their post-election predictions, please raise your hand.
The meeting may not be the strangest thing that has come out of the Trump transition process. (That honour has to go to the Naked Cowboy's appearance in a Trump Tower elevator last week.) It is, however, an unusual development.
Ivanka Trump appears serious about taking on climate change as one of her "signature issues" - and anyone who has her ear also has a direct line to her father.
Mr Gore assuredly made his best case for continuing Barack Obama's efforts to address climate change. But will it make a difference?
Mr Trump has been stocking his administration with conservative ideologues, and many of the possible names for his environmental posts are sceptical of current policy. If Ms Trump pushes the issue and Mr Gore continues his "extremely interesting conversation" with the president, however, this could become a test of how willing President Trump is to cross party orthodoxy.
A free-agent president - beholden to neither party and willing to strike deals according to his own fancy - may be exactly what his voters wanted and what Washington insiders fear.
Mr Gore told reporters he had met Ivanka before his meeting with her father.
"The bulk of the time was with the president-elect, Donald Trump. I found it an extremely interesting conversation, and to be continued," Mr Gore said.

Media captionWhere do Donald Trump supporters get their news from?
'Resistance' to Trump environment plans
Donald Trump: A list of potential conflicts of interest
America's other next first lady?
After leaving the White House in 2001 Mr Gore became an outspoken advocate of finding a solution to address climate change.
In 2006 he starred in the documentary An Inconvenient Truth, which has been credited for raising global awareness.
Ivanka Trump sat in on a meeting with the Japanese prime ministerImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Ivanka Trump sat in on a meeting with the Japanese prime minister shortly after Mr Trump's victory
Ivanka Trump is perceived to be a more progressive voice on her father's transition team, compared to his other advisers.
In the weeks after Mr Trump's surprise election win, New Yorkers posted "Dear Ivanka" messages on social media and outside a Manhattan building owned by her husband, Jared Kushner.
A protester outside Trump Tower declares Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
A protester outside Trump Tower declares "climate change is real"
Many notes appealed to her to prevent her father from rolling back US climate change pledges, including the Paris agreement, which was signed earlier this year at the United Nations in New York.
Environmental groups did not immediately cheer the news of Ms Trump's environmental interest.
"From the start of Trump's presidential run we've seen his team use Ivanka to soften her father's most egregious positions, and there's no reason to think this isn't part of the same plan," Travis Nichols, a spokesman for Greenpeace, told EcoWatch.
a wildfireImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Researchers fear that extreme weather will become more common as the effects of climate change become more obvious
Ivanka Trump and her husband have also reportedly been house-hunting in Washington DC, leading some to speculate that she will continue to serve her father in a political role.
Earlier on Monday, Mr Trump announced that former rival Ben Carson will serve as his Housing and Urban Development secretary.
The former surgeon, who has no experience in government, is Mr Trump's first African-American nominee.
As questions remain over what role Ivanka Trump will have, her father has faced intense criticism over potential conflicts of interest he will encounter once taking over the White House.
He has scheduled a speech for 15 December, which he announced on Twitter will be about "leaving my great business in total in order to fully focus on running the country".
Related Topics
Donald Trump
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
US & Canada
Father and son
Hot car death father sentenced to life
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Hot car death father sentenced to life
Motorist Walter Scott (L) is seen in this composite photo with former South Carolina officer Michael Slager (R).
Mistrial in US police killing of driver
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Mistrial in US police killing of driver
A warehouse in California after a deadly fire
Oakland fire death toll rises to 36
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Oakland fire death toll rises to 36
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Bollywood's Ranveer Singh on racy scenes
Bollywood's Ranveer Singh on racy scenes
 Daisy Ridley: Fame was like a 'sensory overload'
Daisy Ridley: Fame was like a 'sensory overload'
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
 SFA chief Stewart Regan apologises over past failings
SFA chief Stewart Regan apologises over past failings
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 Can Trump outlaw gay marriage?
Can Trump outlaw gay marriage?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
BBC News
Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
 How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
BBC News
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
 The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
BBC News
The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
BBC Future
Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever Closer
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever…
Dassault Systemes
Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
