BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
News From Elsewhere
Ancient Egypt crocodile surprise at Dutch museum
By News from Elsewhere...
...as found by BBC Monitoring
18 November 2016
 Share
The 3D scan image showing the main crocodile in red and the smaller crocodiles in blueImage copyrightINTERSPECTRAL
Image caption
Unexpected find: The baby reptiles can be seen in blue in this image
A new scan of a 2,500-year-old crocodile mummy has stunned experts in the Netherlands by revealing that there are dozens of mummified baby crocs inside.
The 3m-long mummy has been at the National Museum of Antiquities in Leiden since 1828 and is on display in its Egyptian galleries. In the 1990s, a scan showed that there were actually two crocodiles within the wrappings, but did not spot at least 47 individually wrapped youngsters, de Volkskrant news website reports.
It took an advanced three-dimensional CT scan by the Swedish technology company Interspectral to reveal what was hidden inside. "You can't see them very well on the old scans unless you know they're there - and we never expected to find this," says curator Dr Lara Weiss. She says the mummy would have been an offering to the crocodile god Sobek.
The museum describes it as an "exceptional discovery" and says the use of both young and older crocodiles could reflect the ancient Egyptians' belief in life after death. The scan was originally planned as part of preparations for a new exhibit which allows visitors to carry out an "interactive virtual autopsy" on the both the crocodile mummy and that of an Egyptian priest. It will give people a chance to examine each layer and also get a close-up 3D view of the amulets inside the wrappings, the museum says.
In 2015, scientists at the British Museum in London found that a huge mummified crocodile had 20 hatchlings attached to its back. That discovery was also made using a CT scan, which had to be done in 80cm sections because the mummy was so large.
A top-down scan showing two larger crocodiles with baby crocodiles in blue around the edgeImage copyrightINTERSPECTRAL
Image caption
Experts knew the mummy contained two juvenile crocodiles but were not expecting any new discoveries
A close up of the baby crocodilesImage copyrightINTERSPECTRAL
Image caption
The baby crocs are in the exterior bindings of palm rope
Next story: 'Russiano' coffee joke sparks online humour
Use #NewsfromElsewhere to stay up-to-date with our reports via Twitter.
Related Topics
Netherlands
 
More Videos from the BBC
 WalkCar: Hands-on with Japan's car-in-a-bag
WalkCar: Hands-on with Japan's car-in-a-bag
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Mummified baby found in Maidstone Museum
Mummified baby found in Maidstone Museum
 The Battle of the Somme and its end, 100 years on
The Battle of the Somme and its end, 100 years on
 Trump: The world's cartoonists react
Trump: The world's cartoonists react
 This tiny house is home to a family of five
This tiny house is home to a family of five
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 German poster of Baroque old master 'too disturbing'
BBC News
German poster of Baroque old master 'too disturbing'
 Asteroid strike made 'instant Himalayas'
BBC News
Asteroid strike made 'instant Himalayas'
 Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
BBC News
Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
Recommended by Outbrain
Latest Posts
Poles mock ruling party MP's deportation comments
MP suggests non-Catholics should declare they respect "Polish values" or face deportation.
21 November 2016
Egypt girls launch cycling equality campaign
21 November 2016
Ancient Egypt crocodile surprise at Dutch museum
18 November 2016
'Russiano' coffee joke sparks online humour
17 November 2016
More from BBC Monitoring

About BBC Monitoring
Reports and analysis from TV, radio, web and print media around the world
Country Profiles
An instant guide to the history, politics and economics of countries and territories
More from the Magazine
Answering life’s questions through daily features, quizzes and opinions.
 
From Around the Web
 Who is the Most Famous Actor Your Age?
Who is the Most Famous Actor Your Age?
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Hollywood Stars From Each State
Hollywood Stars From Each State
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Canines With the Highest Price Tags
The Canines With the Highest Price Tags
Best Dog Breeds - Pictures, Information, and Reviews
Baby Names That Are Going to Make it Big
Baby Names That Are Going to Make it Big
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
5 Sports Skills Every Guy Should Know
5 Sports Skills Every Guy Should Know
Men's Fitness
South Korean opposition to name prosecutors for Park scandal
South Korean opposition to name prosecutors for…
Nikkei Asian Review
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
