BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
Elton John says HIV 'end in sight' in West
2 December 2016
 From the section Health
Share

Media captionElton John says the "end is in sight" for HIV in the West
The end of HIV "is in sight" in Western countries, but increased testing is vital, Sir Elton John has said.
The music star said early testing could save "millions of pounds each year" for the NHS, in an interview with the BBC's Victoria Derbyshire programme.
His charity, the Elton John Aids Foundation, has offered to finance HIV testing in Lambeth, south London, which has the UK's highest HIV rate.
The PM says the UK is driving advances in HIV prevention and treatment.
About 40% of people diagnosed with HIV in 2014 were diagnosed late, according to Public Health England (PHE) statistics, which Prime Minister Theresa May described as having "a significant impact on their long-term prognosis".
Sir Elton said early testing was essential to ensure people were "diagnosed, they're put on treatment, they won't spread the disease - and we'll know where we stand with the population".
He referenced a project his foundation had implemented at King's College Hospital in London, which allows individuals to be tested for HIV at the same time as receiving a blood test, as an example of how more people can be checked for the disease.
David Furnish, Elton John and Victoria DerbyshireImage copyrightROBERT TIMOTHY
Image caption
David Furnish and Sir Elton say they want to work with the government to improve HIV testing
"Most people are willing to have that, and otherwise they wouldn't have a HIV test," he said. "It is something we want the government to get more involved in."
He added: "We can solve this, we can stop this disease from spreading."
On Thursday, NICE announced new guidance aimed at increasing testing in people with undiagnosed HIV in England.
The updated guidance recommends all patients in areas with "high" and "extremely high" rates of HIV should be offered a test on admission to hospital, if they have not previously been diagnosed with HIV and are undergoing a blood test for another reason.
In extremely high-rate areas, hospitals should offer the tests even if they are not having blood tests as part of their care, NICE recommends.
But councillor Izzi Seccombe, of the Local Government Association, said achieving what NICE was asking was going to be difficult.
David FurnishImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
David Furnish believes everyone should have an HIV test
"The strain placed on councils by the cuts by central government to public health budgets would make commissioning HIV testing in all surgeries and hospitals in high and extremely high-risk areas an unaffordable burden.
"Despite these limited resources, testing those in high-risk areas must always be a priority. Councils are commissioning HIV testing in a variety of settings."
The Department of Health maintained councils had been provided with sufficient funding.
David Furnish, Sir Elton's husband and chairman of the Elton John Aids Foundation, said that he hoped that by funding testing in Lambeth - the UK local authority with the highest rate of HIV - they would help councils to see that "short-term investment pays out handsomely in the long run".
The British HIV Association believes that testing for HIV is "very cost effective" and that "deaths due to late diagnosis are completely preventable through excellent treatments".
But, Mr Furnish said, it was vital to combat the stigma surrounding HIV, which Sir Elton described as "our biggest obstacle" to beating the disease.
blood test tubesImage copyrightSPL
Sir Elton praised the prime minister for her support of World Aids Day, and said he had met Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt.
"We're wanting to work with him at close... because unless you work together there's no point," he said.
It is estimated that 103,700 people are living with HIV in the UK and 17% of people with the virus are unaware of their infection, so risk unintentionally passing it on to their sexual partners.
'Scary time'
Asked by Victoria Derbyshire about his thoughts on the forthcoming presidency of Donald Trump, in relation to HIV, he urged governments around the world to "keep their mandate about Aids".
He said HIV would "balloon again and become another catastrophe" were this not to happen.
"If governments in America say 'we're going to stop funding', it's a very scary time and it would be a tragedy for the world," he added.
Sir Elton was also questioned about the possibility of meeting Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss gay rights in the country - the pair have previously spoken by phone, but a meeting between the two was postponed in May.
The singer said he was "very hopeful" it would happen, but added: "He's a busier man than I am."
The BBC's Victoria Derbyshire programme is broadcast on weekdays from 09:00-11:00 on BBC Two and the BBC News channel.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Elton John charity to fund HIV testing
1 December 2016
HIV myths 'endure from the 1980s'
1 December 2016
HIV vaccine: Clinical trial begins in South Africa
30 November 2016
Why talk of a cure for HIV is premature
3 October 2016
HIV effort let down by test shortages, says WHO
24 August 2016
Related Internet links

Elton John AIDS Foundation -EltonJohn.com
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Young men and women on the beach
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
6 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
HIV
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 The 'debilitating' stigma of HIV
The 'debilitating' stigma of HIV
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 The alpacas protecting 24,000 Christmas turkeys
BBC News
The alpacas protecting 24,000 Christmas turkeys
 Duran Duran 'shocked' after losing legal copyright battle
BBC News
Duran Duran 'shocked' after losing legal copyright battle
 Ten famous by-elections
BBC News
Ten famous by-elections
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
 Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
BBC Autos
Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Ranked from Best to Last
U.S. Presidents Ranked from Best to Last
InsideGov | By Graphiq
First Names Destined for Doctors
First Names Destined for Doctors
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Hollywood Celebrities With Famous Parents
Hollywood Celebrities With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Who is the Most Famous Actress the Same Age as You?
Who is the Most Famous Actress the Same Age as You?
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
