
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Trump's environment plans could spark opposition
By Matt McGrath
Environment correspondent
1 December 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Trump protestersImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Environmental campaigners are gearing up to oppose Donald Trump's plans for the environment
Proposals by the Trump administration to roll back US environmental regulations are likely to foment opposition, say analysts.
The President-elect is likely to push forward plans for fracking and drilling for oil and gas on federal lands.
Campaigners say that this is likely to be opposed in the courts, in Congress and lead to protests.
President Obama is trying to limit the impact of the next administration by extending existing protections.
While much attention since Mr Trump's election has focused on the President-elect's threats to withdraw the US from the Paris Climate Agreement, there is growing concern among green groups about the impact of other aspects of the Trump environmental plan.
One key element is the expansion of oil and gas production on publicly owned lands. At present there is a moratorium on energy recovery in federal areas, and the Trump team has promised to lift this, and encourage fracking and drilling.
President-elect Trump has also been vocal in his support for projects such as the XL oil pipeline, which President Obama rejected.
Attempts to open up public lands for oil and gas, and to push through pipelines will likely attract significant public resistance, say observers.
frackingImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Image caption
There is likely to be a push for increased fracking for oil and gas under the Trump administration
"I think there'll be a lot of people who were very willing to get in the streets and you know, protest with civil disobedience and we're likely to see some real confrontations there," said Dean Baker, an economist with the Centre for Economic and Policy Research.
Environmental campaigners also take the view that opening up federal lands for resource extraction would be foolish and would help unify the opposition.
"I think they will try to expand fracking and mining and drilling on public lands," said Michael Brune from the Sierra Club.
"But that will be pretty fiercely resisted by people who live near those communities, both progressive and conservatives alike."
Even if the Trump administration succeeds in overturning the current moratorium, there may not be a rush from oil and gas companies to exploit these reserves.
"Most of these shale gas (and tight oil) resources are on private lands, according to the Congressional Research Service, so "opening up" public lands will do little to induce production until prices rise and could even have a depressing effect on prices," writes Alan Krupnick in a blog post for Resources for the Future, an independent economic research organisation.
TrumpImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
At a recent meeting with the New York Times, the President-elect said he had an open mind on climate change
"If prices were to fall, the advantage natural gas has over coal would further widen unless coal prices fell as well."
As well as opening up public lands for oil and gas, the incoming administration is likely to try and overturn existing environmental regulations.
In an interview in 2015 Donald Trump labelled the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) "a disgrace" and promised to cut the department if elected.
He has appointed Myron Ebell, well known for his opposition to the scientific consensus on climate change, to head the EPA transition team.
It's likely that many of the actions taken by the EPA, especially recent regulations on methane emissions from pipelines and installations will now be overturned.
"I think these regulations are going to get a very critical look, as to what they're doing in terms of the economic cost versus the climate benefits," said Nick Loris, from the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank.
"I don't know if you will see an energy revolution but I do think there's going to be a look at this regulatory onslaught that's choked off investment to specific energy technologies and energy sources."
The biggest casualty of the Trump presidency is likely to be the Clean Power Plan, the centre piece of the Obama administration's attempts to cut carbon emissions from electricity generation by a third within 15 years.
This plan has already run into trouble in the the courts and even if it isn't ultimately thrown out by the judges, the new administration is likely to let it wither on the vine.
Environmentalists are hopeful though, that the plan has already had some impacts on energy production.
"We have made so much progress in replacing coal with clean energy that many of the early goals of the Clean Power Plan have already been met," said Michael Brune.
"So undermining it won't have the effect that people thought two years ago."
With 29 states now having regulations in place that mandate a proportion of their energy comes from renewable sources, this will also make it difficult for President-elect Trump to turn back the renewable tide and boost coal without getting into a battle with the state governors.
One area where President Obama is rapidly trying to secure his environmentally friendly legacy is through giving extra protections to federal lands.
Earlier this week, the US department of the interior banned gold mining in an area near Yellowstone national park. There are expectations that he will try and extend protection from mining in Utah, Nevada and around the Grand Canyon.
While time is running out for President Obama, the imminent arrival of the Trump environmental agenda is doing wonders for environmental campaigners - Donations are rocketing, and memberships are rising.
"We have seen a surge of donations and volunteers that we haven't see in two decades in the last two weeks," said Michael Brune for the Sierra Club.
"It is good that people are uniting around Trump's proposals, but it is an unwanted silver lining."
Follow Matt on Twitter and on Facebook
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
 
More Videos from the BBC
 At least 67 workers dead at power station in China
At least 67 workers dead at power station in China
 Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 Ofsted boss: Brexit vote linked to poor school performance
Ofsted boss: Brexit vote linked to poor school performance
 Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
BBC News
Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 The alpacas protecting 24,000 Christmas turkeys
BBC News
The alpacas protecting 24,000 Christmas turkeys
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
BBC Culture
Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
9 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up Aviation
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up…
Dassault Systemes
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for Cleaner Energy
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for…
Dassault Systemes
Which Musician Shares Your Birth Year?
Which Musician Shares Your Birth Year?
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Each MLB Team's Worst Player of 2016
Each MLB Team's Worst Player of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
This Actress is the Same Age as You
This Actress is the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Ranked from Best to Last
U.S. Presidents Ranked from Best to Last
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
