
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Europe presses ahead with Mars rover
By Jonathan Amos
BBC Science Correspondent, Lucerne
2 December 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Artwork ExoMarsImage copyrightESA
Image caption
Artwork: The rover would land on the Red Planet in 2021
Europe will push ahead with its plan to put a UK-assembled robotic rover on the surface of Mars in 2021.
Research ministers meeting in Lucerne, Switzerland, have agreed to stump up the outstanding €436m euros needed to take the project through to completion.
The mission is late and is costing far more than originally envisaged, prompting fears that European Space Agency member states might abandon it.
But the ministers have emphatically reaffirmed their commitment to it.
They have also said that European participation in the International Space Station (ISS) should run until at least 2024, bringing Esa into line with its partners on the orbiting laboratory - the US, Russia, Japan and Canada.
This will open new opportunities for European astronauts to visit the station, and it was announced here that Italian Luca Parmitano has been proposed to take up a tour in 2019.

Media captionDG Jan Woerner: "It was not easy asking member states for more money for ExoMars”
The Ministerial Council was convened to set the policies, programmes and funding for Esa over the next three to five years.
Officials at the agency had put a menu before member state delegations valued at some €11bn (£9.5bn; $12bn), covering all manner of activities ranging from rockets and Earth observation to big data management and satellite navigation.
At the end of one and a half days of deliberations, the 22 governments agreed to fund €10.3bn.
"This is a big amount of money that really allows us to go forward," said Prof Jan Woerner, the director general of Esa.
"We need inspiration for the future. Inspiration is a driver, and from inspiration and fascination come motivation. And for me, it's very clear we are responsible for the motivation of the next generation to create the future."
SwitzerlandImage copyrightESA
Image caption
Switzerland viewed by Europe's Sentinel-2 Earth observation satellite
The rover is the second part in a two-step programme known as ExoMars, which is being run jointly with the Russians to explore the possibility of life on the Red Planet.
The first part has just seen a satellite arrive at Mars to investigate trace gases in the atmosphere that may be coming from microbes somewhere on the world.
In the second phase, a robotic rover would follow up these studies by drilling below Mars' dusty surface to try to detect the organisms directly.
But repeated delays in the vehicle's development have increased costs and undermined confidence in the whole endeavour.
Ministers were asked here to reassert their faith in the mission and close the sizeable financial shortfall that has built up.
This they did, committing €339m to cover industry costs on the rover and its associated hardware (Esa is finding another €97m internally).
Italy and the UK, which are the lead nations on ExoMars, offered the most - €171m and €82m respectively.
"Completion of ExoMars was probably the most challenging of our discussions because of the size of the additional resources that have been put on the table," said Prof Roberto Battiston, the president of the Italian space agency (ASI).
"But this was justified by the detailed analysis presented by Esa. We are covering about 45% of the total cost of the mission, which makes us the country that is particularly sensitive to the cost of it."
Dr David Parker, Esa's director of human spaceflight and robotic exploration, said member states stepped up because they continued to view the rover's science as being compelling.
"Nobody else is doing the science that is planned for ExoMars, drilling below the surface of the planet for the first time, below the soil that is irradiated, with a suite of instruments that is actually directly looking for signs of past or present life," he told BBC News.
Ministerial meetingImage copyrightESA
Image caption
Twenty-two nations have full status as member states of the European Space Agency
Britain came to the meeting looking to invest heavily in those areas that feed back into its industrial interests.
This meant making big commitments in satellite telecommunications, in commercial services that involve space data and applications, in Earth observation satellites, and in navigation.
In telecoms and navigation, the UK is the number one nation in Esa following this ministerial. That was to be expected. But Britain also put the most into the environmental sciences, which means it now leads Esa in Earth observation as well. Ahead of Germany. That is a first.
"It's a story about recognising where the new market opportunities are," said Dr Alice Bunn, the UK Space Agency's director of policy.
"We've seen it in telecommunications, but we're seeing it now also in navigation where there is potentially a €30bn market out there in new types of services. And hot on the heels of navigation are opportunities in Earth observation, and we want to position ourselves on the front foot for that."
And to underline the €1.4bn total commitment (over five years) that the UK gave to Esa in Lucerne, science minister Jo Johnson signed an agreement with Mr Woerner to expand activities at Esa's European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications (Ecsat), based in Harwell, Oxfordshire.
Luca ParmitanoImage copyrightESA/NASA
Image caption
It looks like Luca Parmitano is heading back to the space station for a second tour
Jonathan.Amos-INTERNET@bbc.co.uk and follow me on Twitter: @BBCAmos
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
 
More Videos from the BBC
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
 Daughter vows to find dad's killers 20 years after his death
Daughter vows to find dad's killers 20 years after his death
 Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 The fog catcher who brings water to the poor
The fog catcher who brings water to the poor
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Mars probe returns first pictures
BBC News
Mars probe returns first pictures
 The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
BBC News
The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
BBC Future
The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
 The myths and folktales behind Harry Potter
BBC Culture
The myths and folktales behind Harry Potter
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
9 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Ranked: Healthiest Dog Breeds
Ranked: Healthiest Dog Breeds
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB Team
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Danger: Travelers Advised Not to Travel to These Countries
Danger: Travelers Advised Not to Travel to These…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Most
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Most
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
