BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FOOTBALL
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
FA Cup
Results
Fixtures
Top Scorers
FA People's Cup
Live Scores
All Teams
Leagues & Cups
FA Cup third round: League Two Newport or Plymouth to visit Liverpool

4 hours ago From the section Football
Share this page
 
Will there be a shock in the FA Cup third round?
League Two Newport County or Plymouth Argyle will travel to Anfield to face Premier League Liverpool in the FA Cup third round.

West Ham will host Manchester City in the pick of the all-Premier League ties, with Everton set to welcome Leicester City.

Holders Manchester United will entertain Reading, managed by former United defender Jaap Stam.

National League Sutton United will face neighbours AFC Wimbledon.

The 32 third-round ties will be played from 6-9 January 2017.

FA Cup third-round draw
Ipswich v Lincoln	Barrow v Rochdale
Manchester United v Reading	Hull v Swansea
Sunderland v Burnley	QPR v Blackburn
Millwall v Bournemouth	West Ham v Manchester City
Brighton v MK Dons/Charlton	Blackpool v Barnsley
Wigan v Nottm Forest	Birmingham v Newcastle
Chelsea v Peterborough/Notts County	Middlesbrough v Sheff Weds
West Brom v Derby County	Everton v Leicester
Liverpool v Newport/Plymouth	Wycombe v Northampton/Stourbridge
Watford v Burton Albion	Preston v Arsenal
Cardiff v Fulham	Stoke v Wolves
Cambridge Utd v Leeds	Bristol City v Shrewsbury/Fleetwood
Huddersfield v Port Vale	Tottenham v Aston Villa
Brentford v Halifax/Eastleigh	Bolton v Crystal Palace
Norwich v Southampton	Sutton Utd v AFC Wimbledon
Accrington v Luton	Rotherham v Oxford/Macclesfield
Newport are a fan-owned club and chairman Gavin Foxall said of the prospect of a tie at Anfield: "It would absolutely be a massive financial boost for us.

"Certainly for a club like ours it would secure the future for a season or two at least.

"A game at Anfield against Liverpool would rank right up there in the club's history."

While Liverpool's opponents are yet to be decided, the biggest beneficiaries of the definite ties look to be Championship Preston, who welcome 2014 and 2015 winners Arsenal.

"It is great for the football club," manager Simon Grayson told the North End club website. 

"Being at home, it gives your own fans the opportunity to see some world-class players and they don't come much bigger and better than this Arsenal squad at this time."

For holders Manchester United, the visit of Reading will see a return to Old Trafford for former defender Stam, who was part of the 1999 treble-winning team.

"I look forward to that," said Stam's former United team-mate Andy Cole on BBC Two. "He's done very well at Reading. I'm really pleased for him."

The lowest ranked club left in the competition, Stourbridge United, face a potential trip to League Two Wycombe Wanderers, should the seventh-tier Northern Premier League Premier Division club beat Northampton Town in a rearranged fixture.

Of the other non-league sides through to the third round, Barrow will host Rochdale while either Halifax or Eastleigh go to Brentford.

"I think the chairman will be really happy, because at least we're at home," said Barrow manager Paul Cox.


Stunning goals from the FA Cup second round
Share this page
Find out more

Match of the Day Facebook

Read more on Match of the Day Facebook
Match of the Day Twitter

Read more on Match of the Day Twitter
BBC Sport Facebook

Read more on BBC Sport Facebook
BBC Sport Twitter

Read more on BBC Sport Twitter
The FA Cup

Read more on The FA Cup
Top Stories

Supporters and families pay tribute to the deceased
Chapecoense awarded cup after plane crash

5h
Read more on Chapecoense awarded cup after plane crash
England captain Alastair Cook kisses the Ashes urn
Bayliss expects Cook to captain England in Ashes

9h From the section Cricket
Read more on Bayliss expects Cook to captain England in Ashes
Paul Stewart and Andy Wodward
Child sex abuse claims - the story so far

10h From the section Football
Read more on Child sex abuse claims - the story so far
Related to this story

Man City & Chelsea charged by FA

10h From the section Football
Read more on Manchester City and Chelsea charged over player behaviour
Blatter six-year ban upheld after appeal

13h From the section Football
Read more on Sepp Blatter: Former Fifa president's six-year ban upheld after appeal to Cas
Bilic backed by West Ham owner Sullivan

10h From the section Football
Read more on Slaven Bilic: West Ham boss backed by co-owner David Sullivan
Premier League Predictor: Play now

6 Aug
Read more on Premier League Predictor: Play now

 
From Around the Web
 Every Clint Eastwood Movie Ranked from Worst to Best
Every Clint Eastwood Movie Ranked from Worst to Best
PrettyFamous
This Game Will Keep You Up All Night!
This Game Will Keep You Up All Night!
Sparta
The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
These Are the Most Dangerous Countries for Travel
These Are the Most Dangerous Countries for Travel
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Muscle & Fitness
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
BBC Sport features
Football alerts, newsletters and social media
Get latest scores and headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Gossip column logo
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.
5 live's football daily podcast
Commentaries, clips and podcasts
Enjoy the best debate, analysis and interviews with 5 live and World Service football plus our commentary listings.
Women playing football
How to get into Football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
