BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Magazine
100 Women 2016: Researching the female orgasm
By Phoebe Keane
BBC World Service
2 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Share

Media captionDr Cindy Meston, one of the BBC's 100 Women, explains the sympathetic nervous system
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
The city getting rich from fake news
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
You may be used to hearing about the female orgasm from women's magazines rather than scientists, but researchers are slowly beginning to study it - and often contradicting the advice columns. Part of the problem, they say, is that the female body has been studied far less than the male body and is far less well understood.
"I call it the ring of fire. It felt like fire in a circle in between my legs and that was a constant feeling - it was burn-y itchy, and then with intercourse or even a tampon it was like a serrated knife, very painful."
Callista Wilson, a San Francisco fashion stylist, first experienced this when trying to use a tampon at the age of 12. She was in her 20s before she finally saw a doctor.
"She seemed extremely puzzled that anything would be wrong," Callista says. "She said: 'You look perfectly normal so I would suggest you go to a therapist to talk about whatever's causing you this pain, it must be in your head.'"
Callista Wilson
Image caption
Callista Wilson consulted 20 doctors before her problem was solved
And it was another 10 years before Callista got a proper diagnosis.
Her sexual problems during this period affected every aspect of her life, she says, leading to depression and the breakdown of her relationship. Finally, after seeing 20 doctors, she found herself in the waiting room of Dr Andrew Goldstein, director of the Center for Vulvovaginal Disorders in Washington DC.
He told her that she had been born with 30 times the normal amount of nerve endings in the opening of her vagina - which meant that when her vagina was touched, it felt as though it was being burned. The solution was to have a circle of skin at the opening of her vagina removed. Once that was done, she was able to experience pain-free sex for the first time.
line
100 women BBC season logo
What is 100 women?
BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre.
Other stories you might like:
'I married a man to keep my girlfriend'
'Adults are so obsessed with children they have no time for important things'
Who is on the BBC's 100 Women 2016 list?
Callista's problem, known as congenital neuroproliferative vestibulodynia, is not common. But one thing researchers have recently come to understand is that the pelvic nerve system varies enormously from one woman to the next.
When New York gynaecologist Dr Deborah Coady began to look into the subject she found the nerves in the male genital region were fully mapped, but there was no information about women. So she teamed up with specialist surgeons and did the work herself, with interesting results.
"We've learned that there's probably no two of us that are alike when it comes to the branching of the pudendal nerve," Coady says.
"The way the branches [of the nerve] move through the body leads to difference in sexuality, meaning what areas may be more sensitive for one woman may not be for another."
The pudendal nerve is the most important nerve for making orgasms happen - it's the one that links the genitals to the brain-firing messages of touch, pressure and sexual activity.
Coady also found that each woman has a different number of nerve endings at each of the five erogenous zones in the genital area - the clitoris, the vaginal opening, the cervix, the anus and the perineum.
"This leads to why some women may be more sensitive in the clitoral area, some may be more sensitive just in the vaginal opening," she says.
Find out more
Listen to Why Factor: The Female Orgasm on the BBC World Service on Friday 2 December
Click here for transmission times, or to listen online (from 19:30 GMT)
And it is one reason why generic sex advice in women's magazines is often unhelpful.
"Fifty per cent may respond the way the magazine says," Coady points out. "But then there's going to be another bunch that - due to their anatomy, and due to the fact that nerves vary in all of us - may not respond like the magazine says."
For years we were told, 'Have a bubble bath, calm down, listen to relaxing music, do deep breathing exercises, chill out before sex'
Dr Cindy Meston, University of Texas at Austin
Another big myth has been exposed at Dr Cindy Meston's sexual psychophysiology lab at the University of Texas at Austin.
When you think of a lab, you might think of lots of white, hard surfaces, bright lights and microscopes, but this one is quite different. People who take part in Meston's studies sit on a purple leather reclining sofa opposite a widescreen TV and watch videos of people having sex.
From the next room, Meston monitors their heart rate and the blood flow to their genitals, using a vaginal photoplethysmograph. Two inches long and about the size and shape of a tampon, it is inserted into the vagina. When switched on it emits a light, and by measuring how much light is reflected back, the scientists are able to tell how much blood is flowing into the vaginal tissue - and therefore how physically aroused the woman is.
Dr Meston (r) explains how to use the vaginal photoplethysmograph
Image caption
Dr Meston (r) explains how to use the vaginal photoplethysmograph
White line 10 pixels
Vaginal photoplathysmograph
The results of Meston's studies go against perceived wisdom.
"For years we were told, 'Have a bubble bath, calm down, listen to relaxing music, do deep breathing exercises, chill out before sex,'" she says.
"But my research shows the opposite, that you actually want to get women in an active state.
"So, you can run around the block with your partner and get them to chase you around the block, or watch a scary movie together, ride a rollercoaster together, even a good comedy act. If you really get laughing, you're going to have a sympathetic activation response."
Meston is talking about the sympathetic nervous system, which is responsible for subconscious muscle contractions that get us ready for the flight or fight mode, like heart rate and blood pressure. She has found that if this system is activated before sex it will help women respond more intensely and more quickly.
It's quite the opposite for men.
For years it was assumed women worked in the same way as men but Meston's work has shown this to be a mistake.
Andrew Goldstein has also been aware since his student days that the female body and female sexuality is poorly understood.
"I completed a residency in obstetrics and gynaecology that was 20,000 hours," he says. "I had one 45-minute lecture on female sexual function and I can tell you what was said during that 45 minutes was almost all completely wrong,"
He adds: "Any sexual problem in women is given less importance than any sexual dysfunction in men. I think that there's clearly a double standard. Unfortunately it's obvious if men have sexual dysfunction, if they have erectile problems, you can see that, [whereas] women are stigmatised if they have any dysfunction. They are told it's in their head."
I completed a residency in obstetrics and gynaecology that was 20,000 hours - and I had one 45-minute lecture on female sexual function
Dr Andrew Goldstein, Center for Vulvovaginal Disorders
Meston says that it is hard to get funding for research into female sexual pleasure - the female orgasm is not seen as a "significant enough social problem", she argues. She also detects in the medical establishment a puritanical disapproval of this area of study.
"There are a lot of conservative reviewers who don't want to see federal funds going into sex research and so as a sex researcher you have to be a little bit creative," she says. "I was told straight-out to take 'sex' out of my proposal. They told me: 'You can talk about well-being or marital satisfaction, but talking about sexual arousal or orgasm as an ultimate end point will diminish your chances of getting funded.'"
Everyone's born out of a vagina, why don't we know more about them?
Callista Wilson
On one occasion she was invited to speak to a group of retired academics, but was "un-invited" when the subject, Women's Sexuality, was advertised.
"There was such resistance and horror that we'd be talking about female sexual pleasure," she says. "I was horrified and offended. It depressed me to tell you the truth. I thought we were at least beyond that."
How does Callista Wilson feel when she hears about the difficulty of carrying out the kind of research that brought to an end her years of pain?
"Everyone's born out of a vagina, why don't we know more about them?" she says.
"Why don't we care more about them? Why aren't we more invested in them? This would benefit men and women to have more research and funding and more conversations about this. It would only benefit everyone."
Join the conversation - find us on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and Twitter
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
4 December 2016
'I was there when gunmen tried to kill Bob Marley'
4 December 2016
Magazine
Luther Windley
Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Manila at night
Video
Video
Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Manila's brutal nightshift
Hands typing on keyboard
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article The city getting rich from fake news
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
 Trump's turnabout from 'lock her up' to no prosecution
Trump's turnabout from 'lock her up' to no prosecution
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 SFA chief Stewart Regan apologises over past failings
SFA chief Stewart Regan apologises over past failings
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Family come forward in wedding snaps mystery
BBC News
Family come forward in wedding snaps mystery
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 Tennessee wildfires: Death toll rises to 11
BBC News
Tennessee wildfires: Death toll rises to 11
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
BBC Future
Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
 Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
BBC Culture
Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Dassault Systemes
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up Aviation
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up…
Dassault Systemes
The 8 worst protein sources for men
The 8 worst protein sources for men
Men's Fitness
8 Things That Gross Women Out In Bed
8 Things That Gross Women Out In Bed
Muscle & Fitness
Here Are the Best and Worst Meryl Streep Movies
Here Are the Best and Worst Meryl Streep Movies
PrettyFamous
What to do if your girlfriend doesn't like the way you kiss
What to do if your girlfriend doesn't like the way you…
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
