BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FOOTBALL
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Premier League
Results
Fixtures
Table
Predictor
Top Scorers
Live Scores
All Teams
Leagues & Cups
MON, 21 NOV 2016PREMIER LEAGUE
4
0
Phillips (4' minutes), Morrison (16' minutes), Fletcher (37' minutes), Rondón (64' minutes)	
FT
HT 3-0
West Bromwich Albion 4-0 Burnley
By Saj Chowdhury
BBC Sport
4 hours ago From the section Football
Share this page
 Matt Phillips scores
Matt Phillips opened the scoring for West Brom after four minutes
West Brom scored three first-half goals as they swept aside a Burnley team that is struggling away from home this season.

The Clarets, now with only one point from 15 on their travels, got off to an awful start when Matt Phillips turned six yards out and fired high past keeper Tom Heaton.

I broke my leg here at 17 and I have never had a result here

Burnley manager Sean Dyche
Like Phillips, James Morrison also scored for a second successive game when he ran on to Salomon Rondon's pass and curled a low shot inside Heaton's near post from the edge of the box.

And the impressive Phillips provided the cross for the third, which was tapped in at the far post by Darren Fletcher for his first of the season.

Forward Rondon produced another terrific all-round performance and was rewarded with a goal after the break when his strike took two slight deflections as it beat Heaton.

The Baggies are back up to ninth in the Premier League, replacing Bournemouth, while Burnley move one place down to 12th.

Relive the action from The Hawthorns
Listen - Baggies fan delights in 4-0 win
Pulis on the attack?

This Monday night clash was not given a big billing as two mid-table sides met on a wet evening in the Midlands.

However, the Baggies had demonstrated some bite in their attacking play during their 2-1 win at Leicester two weeks ago, with former QPR player Phillips to the fore.

He was again dazzling down the flank and scored a brilliant opener in a cohesive team display.

The Scotland forward had three shots and set up Fletcher's goal - yet he was possibly not the home side's most impressive player, with Rondon and Morrison arguably their brightest performers.


West Brom 4-0 Burnley: Sean Dyche says performance not good enough
Venezuelan Rondon gave Burnley centre-backs Michael Keane and Ben Mee a tough workout. The 6ft 2in forward's hold-up play allowed Morrison to provide an attacking threat and the Scotland midfielder, recently back from a long-term injury, scored a terrific second.

His countryman Fletcher then added a third from close-range just before half-time, the first time since 2009 that three Scottish players had scored in one Premier League game.

Rondon was rewarded for his admirable efforts for the team with a low strike in the 64th minute.

Sloppy Burnley punished

This was the first time this season Burnley had finished a league game with more than 50% possession, which highlights how those statistics cannot be relied upon to tell the tale of the game.

The Clarets out-passed West Brom 483-401 but were guilty of giving the ball away in dangerous areas. Keane and Heaton - touted as future England players - were exposed at the back, with the keeper at fault when he allowed Morrison's strike to beat him while his sloppy pass almost resulted in a second for the Scot.

The only time Baggies keeper Ben Foster was troubled was when he tipped Johann Berg Gudmundsson's free-kick on to the bar.

Man of the match - Salomon Rondon (West Brom)

Salomon Rondon
Rondon played his part as the physical frontman perfectly but also showed awareness of his team-mates - he scored one, set up Morrison and was a pain for Burnley's defence to deal with
'Salomon feels part of the group'

Baggies boss Tony Pulis praised his team and striker Rondon's display against Burnley.

"We are pleased - it was going to be a tough game, Sean Dyche's players are honest and hard-working but we got goals at the right time," he said.

"Every three points are enormous and back-to-back wins are very important. I'm pleased for the supporters as well.


West Brom 4-0 Burnley: Tony Pulis says Baggies scored at right times
"We will take every game as it comes - the most important thing is to make sure we are ready for Hull this weekend, that will be such a tough game.

"I'm pleased for Salomon, who has upped his game this season. He has settled in, he feels part of the group and he is such a smashing lad."

'We need to show more belief'

Pulis' counterpart Sean Dyche said his side need more belief away from home.

"It was not good enough - the first half particularly. The game was done at half-time," said the Clarets boss.

"We just got drunk on keeping the ball and playing in front of them and that is what they want you to do, so they can counter attack. We got sucked into it - even though we had told the players what to expect.

"We have good points on the board but you have to build on what you are doing at home and take that on the road. I think some of that is a mentality thing - to play with more belief.

"We have had two below-par performances on TV - here and at Southampton, we were miles off it.

"I broke my leg here at 17 and I have never had a result here - one of the few grounds in the country where I have had nothing."

West Brom equal their best margin of victory

This was the second time three different Scottish players scored for a team in a Premier League game (also Burnley v Man City, November 2009).
This was only the third time in 284 games that a side managed by Pulis have scored four goals in a Premier League game, two of which have been this season with West Brom (4-0 v Burnley and 4-2 v West Ham).
West Brom's 4-0 win over Burnley is their joint-biggest margin of victory in a Premier League match.
Burnley haven't won away in the league at the Hawthorns since December 1969, losing on nine of their 10 visits since.
Since the start of 2015/16, Rondon has been involved in 17 Premier League goals (13 goals, 4 assists); more than any other WBA player.
Morrison netted in back-to-back Premier League games for the first time since September 2008.
Phillips scored in consecutive Premier League appearances for the first time in his career.
Craig Dawson made his 100th Premier League appearance for West Brom, becoming the 12th player to reach this milestone for the Baggies.
What's next?

Burnley have a tough home fixture against Manchester City at 12:30 GMT on Saturday and West Brom are at Hull on the same day (15:00 GMT).

Line-ups
Match Stats
Live Text
Home TeamWest BromAway TeamBurnley
Possession
Home45%Away55%
Shots
Home16Away5
Shots on Target
Home6Away2
Corners
Home4Away3
Fouls
Home12Away12
Share this page
Find out more

Match of the Day Facebook

Read more on Match of the Day Facebook
Match of the Day Twitter

Read more on Match of the Day Twitter
BBC Sport Facebook

Read more on BBC Sport Facebook
BBC Sport Twitter

Read more on BBC Sport Twitter
Premier League official site

Read more on Premier League official site
Scores, Results & Fixtures

TUESDAY 22ND NOVEMBER 2016
West Brom
4
Burnley
0
FT
View all Premier League results
As It Stood

Team	P	GD	Pts
1		
Chelsea
12	18	28
2		
Liverpool
12	16	27
3		
Man City
12	16	27
4		
Arsenal
12	13	25
5		
Tottenham
12	10	24
6		
Man Utd
12	3	19
7		
Everton
12	2	19
8		
Watford
12	-3	18
9	
West Brom
12	1	16
10	
Bournemouth
12	-2	15
11	
Southampton
12	0	14
12	
Burnley
12	-8	14
13		
Stoke
12	-6	13
14		
Leicester
12	-6	12
15		
Middlesbrough
12	-3	11
16		
Crystal Palace
12	-4	11
17		
West Ham
12	-10	11
18		
Hull
12	-17	10
19		
Sunderland
12	-9	8
20		
Swansea
12	-11	6
View full Premier League table
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Jurgen Klinsmann
Klinsmann sacked as United States boss

6h From the section Football
Read more on Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
Related to this story

Berahino back at French conditioning camp

1d From the section Football
Read more on Saido Berahino: Striker returns to France to continue fitness regime
Premier League Predictor: Play now

6 Aug
Read more on Premier League Predictor: Play now

 
From Around the Web
 US Presidents: Poorest to Richest
US Presidents: Poorest to Richest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Gamers around the world have been waiting for this game!
Gamers around the world have been waiting for this game!
Forge Of Empires
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of addicted players!
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of…
Soldiers
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
InsideGov | By Graphiq
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Child Anymore
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Child Anymore
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Promoted content by Outbrain
Explore the BBC

Metallica
Enter Metallica
Performing at Maida Vale for the first time ever with the session of all sessions!
 BBC Sport features
Football alerts, newsletters and social media
Get latest scores and headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Gossip column logo
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.
5 live's football daily podcast
Commentaries, clips and podcasts
Enjoy the best debate, analysis and interviews with 5 live and World Service football plus our commentary listings.
Women playing football
How to get into Football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
