BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
Australia
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
US & Canada
100 Women 2016: What to look forward to
21 November 2016
 From the section World
Share
Alicia Keys plays pianoImage copyrightTHEO WARGO
Image caption
Alicia Keys is one of the high-profile women who features in our season
100 Women

BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
Video Winnie Harlow: 'My skin doesn't define me'
We're back and bigger than ever! For the next three weeks we will bring you the stories of our 100 Women: groundbreaking moments of defiance, debates on the inclusivity of feminism and conversations with world famous leaders in music, sport and politics, as well as with other less well-known voices.
Here are just a few of the things you should watch out for:
Singer-songwriter Alicia Keys talks to us about race, Donald Trump, bringing up boys and why she's determined to look the way she wants to look.
Simone Biles tells us about becoming the greatest gymnast of all time, about growing up in Obama's America, and about how she is coping with her new-found fame.
The range of women in the Mexico festival
Image caption
100 Women's first live festival is in Mexico City on 24 November
BBC 100 Women will be hosting our first live festival in the heart of Mexico City, featuring music, art, dance and debate. The Mexico festival will also showcase the BBC's first virtual reality experience. Based on testimonies from rescued women, the documentary allows you to "live" the story of a woman who is trafficked by cartels and is just about to be rescued.
In July a young American woman in a flowing dress stood with her arms crossed facing down a line of heavily armed police. The woman behind the now-famous photograph is Ieshia Evans.
She talks to us about protest and resistance. Ieshia is part of our series on five women defying expectations and boundaries around the world.
Iesha Evans stand sup to police linesImage copyrightJONATHAN BACHMAN
Image caption
The iconic image of Ieshia Evans during this summer's protests
In a special discussion, we will be tackling a pertinent question: Does Feminism include all women? Kimberle Williams Crenshaw, Heather Rabbatts and Gail Lewis explore whether the feminist movement has succeeded in engaging all women regardless of race, ethnicity, and sexuality. This is a conversation in three parts you don't want to miss.
BBC Asian Network will also be taking part in our series of debates, asking: "Is the glass ceiling raised higher for British Asian Women?" Join the conversation #100Women
line
100 women BBC season logo
What is 100 women?
BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre. We continue to ask:
How are women faring in the 21st-Century economy where you live?
Will women take on a bigger role in politics and business? Or is there a "global glass ceiling"?
What do you see as the biggest risks women face? What about the biggest opportunities?
And - of course - what about the media? Do we misrepresent women? Do we tell their stories properly?
We want YOU to get involved with your comments, views and ideas. You can find us on: Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat, and YouTube.
Spread the word by sharing your favourite posts and your own stories using #100women
Meet the Mother of Trees. We visit 105-year-old Saalumarada Thimmakka who has planted and nurtured hundreds of banyan trees in rural India, in a bid to improve her environment and combat the stigma surrounding her childlessness.
Profile of Saalumarada Thimmakka
Image caption
Saalumarada Thimmakka nurtures hundreds of trees in India
We are ending our season by asking: Is the internet sexist? Wikipedia is the seventh most popular site in the world but only 15% of Wikipedia editors are women and fewer than 15% of its notable profiles are of women.
We are joining up with Wikipedia to hold a 12-hour edit-a-thon to encourage more women to edit and write articles and profiles about women.
On 8 December we want you to get involved- join our site, learn how to edit and join the hashtag #100womenwiki
Related Topics
Gender
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Who were the BBC's 100 Women of 2015?
17 November 2015
Who were the 100 Women in 2014?
26 October 2014
Who were the 100 Women in 2013?
22 November 2013
100 Women

BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
21 November 2016
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
21 November 2016
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
21 November 2016
Video Winnie Harlow: 'My skin doesn't define me'
21 November 2016
World
Protesters in Washington
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
The Fukushima nuclear plant in Japan, 18 November 2016
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
22 November 2016
 From the section Asia
Full article Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
Kanye West
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
21 November 2016
From the section Entertainment & Arts
Full article Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Selena Gomez says she was 'broken' by depression
Selena Gomez says she was 'broken' by depression
 Meghan Markle: Meet Prince Harry's girlfriend
Meghan Markle: Meet Prince Harry's girlfriend
 Hillary Clinton: 'I never wanted to leave the house again'
Hillary Clinton: 'I never wanted to leave the house again'
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Noisy Oxford Brookes student concern 'extremely serious'
Noisy Oxford Brookes student concern 'extremely serious'
 'How my porn addiction led to erectile dysfunction’
'How my porn addiction led to erectile dysfunction’
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 North Dakota pipeline: Police fire water cannon at protesters
BBC News
North Dakota pipeline: Police fire water cannon at protesters
 Jessica Whelan cancer death: Four-year-old who touched hearts dies
BBC News
Jessica Whelan cancer death: Four-year-old who touched hearts dies
 Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
BBC News
Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Why car designers stick with clay
BBC Autos
Why car designers stick with clay
 The 22 syllables that can get you killed
BBC Culture
The 22 syllables that can get you killed
 The greatest TV shows never made
BBC Culture
The greatest TV shows never made
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
42 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3 minutes ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
5
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
8
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
9
The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
10
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
 
From Around the Web
 These Dog Breeds Are the Healthiest
These Dog Breeds Are the Healthiest
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to remove Park
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to…
Nikkei Asian Review
Trendy Irish Baby Names
Trendy Irish Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
25 Names Parents Are Avoiding Like the Plague
25 Names Parents Are Avoiding Like the Plague
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
100 Most Famous Actors and Actresses from Across the Pond
100 Most Famous Actors and Actresses from…
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Cities With the Most Car Accidents
The Cities With the Most Car Accidents
@GraphiqHQ
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
