BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
selected
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Business
selected
Market Data
Markets
Economy
Companies
Entrepreneurship
Technology of Business
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

In the future, will farming be fully automated?
By Padraig Belton
Technology of Business reporter
25 November 2016
 From the section Business
Share
Tractor working a field at nightImage copyrightCNH INDUSTRIAL
Image caption
Driverless autonomous tractors can work equally well at night
Technology of Business

Can start-ups stop the world's students drowning in debt?
The many ways lasers help us see the world more clearly
Why can it take so long before starting your new job?
Can hi-tech toys be fun and educational?
In the not-too-distant future, our fields could be tilled, sown, tended and harvested entirely by fleets of co-operating autonomous machines by land and air.
And they'll be working both day and night.
Driverless tractors that can follow pre-programmed routes are already being deployed at large farms around the world.
Drones are buzzing over fields assessing crop health and soil conditions. Ground sensors are monitoring the amount of water and nutrients in the soil, triggering irrigation and fertiliser applications.
And in Japan, the world's first entirely automated lettuce farm is due for launch next year.
The future of farming is automated.
Food shortages, big business
The World Bank says we'll need to produce 50% more food by 2050 if the global population continues to rise at its current pace.
But the effects of climate change could see crop yields falling by more than a quarter.
So autonomous tractors, ground-based sensors, flying drones and enclosed hydroponic farms could all help farmers produce more food, more sustainably at lower cost.
No wonder the agricultural robotics sector is growing so fast.
Driverless tractor tilling in fieldImage copyrightCNH INDUSTRIAL
Image caption
Autonomous tractors may become a common sight in our fields
One report, by US firm WinterGreen Research, forecasts that the market will grow from $817m (£655m) in 2013 to $16.3bn (£13bn) by 2020.
But investment bank Goldman Sachs is far more bullish, predicting a $240bn market over the next five years. Manufacturers including John Deere, CNH Industrial and AGCO are all fighting to corner the market in driverless tractors.
As well as big kit, small kit is giving farmers up-to-the-second data on the state of their fields and produce - what Dr Roland Leidenfrost of Deepfield Robotics calls the "internet of plants and fields".
Bosch start-up Deepfield, based in Germany, is working to automate the growing and testing of seed crops, tracking the susceptibility to weeds and drought of different genetic varieties.
Meanwhile, engineers in Shropshire, England, are trying to show it is now possible to farm a field without a human setting foot in it at all.
The Hands Free Hectare project will use flying drones and automated tractors in the coming year to grow and harvest a cereal crop.
Aerial shot of field being ploughed by driverless tractorImage copyrightHARPER ADAMS UNIVERSITY
Image caption
The Hands Free Hectare project aims to cultivate a field without humans setting foot on it
Engineers from Harper Adams University - together with a North Yorkshire farming technology company called Precision Decisions - are testing prototype machines now, and aim to plant their crop in March for harvest in September.
Precision pruning
It's hard to imagine the most traditional of agricultural sectors - wine making - as needing more than natural sunshine and soil. But even here automation is encroaching.
Wine makers have used drones to inspect their vineyards for several years, with high-definition cameras and sensors assessing crop and soil health.
But in France's Burgundy region, a shortage of farm labour has led inventor Christophe Millot to develop a vine-pruning robot called Wall-Ye.
Vine pruning robot in vineyardImage copyrightWALL-YE
Image caption
This automated vine pruner can make a cut every five seconds
The latest generation of this trundling four-wheeled robot can make a cut every five seconds. It has six cameras - some with infrared sensors - and two arms, and is controlled by a tablet computer inside.
The machine learns as it goes and can trim the grass around each vine. An onboard solar-powered battery gives 10-12 hours of charge, so with a change of battery, it can work day and night.
Visual recognition is the biggest challenge, says Mr Millot - knowing where to make the cut. This is actually easier at night, because the robot's lights can illuminate the plant, but not its background.
Next year, he plans to go to California - another major wine-producing area - to market his range of winery robots there.
Robo lettuce
But some people think farming land is old hat.
Japanese firm Spread's automated vegetable factory in Kyoto, due to launch next year, could produce 30,000 lettuces a day, the company says.
It stretches up, instead of across undulating fields, because "in countries like Japan, where land is actually a very scarce resource, it makes more sense to stack your production, just like a skyscraper," says JJ Price, Spread's global marketing manager.
Everything after seeding will be done by machines - watering, trimming, harvesting - on shelves stacked from floor to ceiling. It's a bit like the solitary drone farmers in the 1972 film Silent Running.
Young lettuces under LED lights on racksImage copyrightSPREAD
Image caption
Spread's fully automated lettuce factory is due to open next year
Automation has reduced labour costs by 50%, says Mr Price. And LED lighting developed specifically for plant cultivation reduces energy costs by 30%.
"It doesn't matter what the weather or climate is outside," he says.
And growing vegetables in vertical farms means you can recycle 98% of the water, says Mr Price, and produce food much closer to where people consume it, cutting down on transport costs and emissions.
Drone monitors
Back outside, drones are monitoring crop growth rates, spotting disease, and even spraying crops with pesticides and herbicides.
Now researchers are also trying to make them co-operate and work in swarms.
If they are mapping weeds in a field, say, "the drones will recruit each other to converge on those areas where the weed presence is higher," says Dr Vito Trianni of the Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies in Rome.
Copter drone spraying fruit treesImage copyrightHSE
Image caption
Drones are being used for precision crop spraying
Although GPS signals are generally strong in agricultural areas, one challenge for drones and other farmland robots is coping with patchy internet and mobile connectivity.
So Dr Trianni's team is using ultra-wideband radio for his drones to communicate without relying on rural 3G or 4G mobile connections.
Of course, automation might promise more efficient food production, but it also threatens agricultural jobs.
From 1950 to 2010, according to the International Labour Organization (ILO), agricultural labourers as a percentage of the workforce declined from 81% to 48.2% in developing countries, and from 35% to 4.2% in developed ones.
Robots will surely accelerate this decline.
Follow Technology of Business editor Matthew Wall on Twitter
Click here for more Technology of Business features
Related Topics
Agriculture
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Technology of Business

Can start-ups stop the world's students drowning in debt?
2 December 2016
The many ways lasers help us see the world more clearly
29 November 2016
Why can it take so long before starting your new job?
22 November 2016
Can hi-tech toys be fun and educational?
18 November 2016
The proven health trackers saving thousands of lives
15 November 2016
How do you keep bananas fresh as they cross the oceans?
11 November 2016
How a traumatised dog inspired a sharing economy business
8 November 2016
Business
Mark Carney
Carney warns about disillusioned poor
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Carney warns about disillusioned poor
A copy of the local Chinese magazine Global People with a cover story that translates to 
Trump in Twitter outburst against China
5 December 2016
 From the section China 438 comments
Full article Trump in Twitter outburst against China
NYSE traders
Dow rises to a fresh record close
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Dow rises to a fresh record close
 
More Videos from the BBC
 At least 67 workers dead at power station in China
At least 67 workers dead at power station in China
 Iraqi Christians returning to villages destroyed by IS
Iraqi Christians returning to villages destroyed by IS
 Daughter vows to find dad's killers 20 years after his death
Daughter vows to find dad's killers 20 years after his death
 Link between Shenzhen and HK stock markets goes live
Link between Shenzhen and HK stock markets goes live
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Storm Desmond flood report published
Storm Desmond flood report published
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
BBC News
The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
 Cirque du Soleil founder's son dies in on-stage accident
BBC News
Cirque du Soleil founder's son dies in on-stage accident
 Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
BBC News
Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
BBC Future
The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
 Why we should send politicians to space
BBC Future
Why we should send politicians to space
 Welcome to Future Now
BBC Future
Welcome to Future Now
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
10 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 40 Baby Names Destined for Doctors
40 Baby Names Destined for Doctors
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Ranked: Clint Eastwood Movies from Worst to First
Ranked: Clint Eastwood Movies from Worst to First
PrettyFamous
These Are the Most Dangerous Countries for Travel
These Are the Most Dangerous Countries for Travel
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Caribbean Coconut Shrimp Recipe
Caribbean Coconut Shrimp Recipe
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
