BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
Menu
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
World News TV
In Pictures
Also in the News
Special Reports
Explainers
The Reporters
Have Your Say
Ginkgo 'living fossil' genome decoded
21 November 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
GinkgoImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
The Ginkgo tree has had its genetic code laid bare by researchers.
The tree is famed for being a “living fossil” - a term used to describe those organisms that have experienced very little change over millions of years.
In the case of the species Ginkgo biloba, there are specimens preserved in the rock record from 270 million years ago, in the Permian Period.
The Chinese-led research team says the new information should help to explain the tree’s evolutionary success.
Image caption
The ginkgo tree's emblematic fan-shaped leaf preserved as a 49-million-year-old fossil with modern autumn leaf overlaid
Its resilience is legendary: it was one of the few living things to survive the atomic bomb blast in the Japanese city of Hiroshima in 1945.
A Ginkgo is known to produce chemicals that are unpalatable to the insects that try to eat it, and will counter the fungi and bacteria that attempt to attack it.
Researchers can now more easily identify the mechanisms that drive these capabilities.
The Ginkgo’s genome is huge, comprising some 10.6 billion DNA "letters".
By way of comparison, the human genome contains fewer than three billion letters.
Written in the Ginkgo’s DNA code are roughly 41,840 predicted genes, the “templates” that the tree’s cells use to make the complex protein molecules that build and maintain the organism.
The initial analysis of the genome, published in the journal GigaScience, suggests there has been extensive expansion through time of gene families that provide for a variety of defensive mechanisms.
Its anti-insect arsenal is particularly smart. The Ginkgo will synthesise one set of chemicals to directly fight a pest, but also release another set of compounds that specifically attract the insect’s enemies.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Oberhausen overview: How the city is coping with its migrant influx
Oberhausen overview: How the city is coping with its migrant influx
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Doctor Who missing episode restored after 50 years
Doctor Who missing episode restored after 50 years
 'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
 The colours of my skin don't define me
The colours of my skin don't define me
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 British woman 'arrested in Dubai after reporting rape'
BBC News
British woman 'arrested in Dubai after reporting rape'
 In pictures: Snow falls across England - with more forecast
BBC News
In pictures: Snow falls across England - with more forecast
 Yellowstone Park accident victim dissolved in boiling acidic pool
BBC News
Yellowstone Park accident victim dissolved in boiling acidic pool
Recommended by Outbrain
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
22 November 2016
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
22 November 2016
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
22 November 2016
Features & Analysis

War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
From Around the Web
 Japan to offer 1-year path to permanent residency
Japan to offer 1-year path to permanent…
Nikkei Asian Review
Popular Italian Baby Names
Popular Italian Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
25 Celebrities That Vote Red
25 Celebrities That Vote Red
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Hollywood Stars From Each State
Hollywood Stars From Each State
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to learn a language!
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to…
Babbel
25 Least Popular Pups to Own
25 Least Popular Pups to Own
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

Sport
Weather
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
