BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Health
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
By James Gallagher
Health and science reporter, BBC News website
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Share
HIVImage copyrightSPL
A drug that dramatically reduces the risk of being infected with HIV will now be given to patients by the NHS in England.
The health service lost a court battle in the summer after arguing responsibility for paying for it should fall to local authorities not the NHS.
Now at least 10,000 people will be given the "Prep" drug in a three-year-long clinical trial.
NHS England says this will help them understand how to offer it more widely.
Pre-exposure prophylaxis or Prep is a daily pill that disables HIV before it gets a stranglehold in the body.
It costs £400 a month per person and trials suggest it can cut the risk of being infected by up to 86%.
NHS England, which fought not to offer the drug, said in a statement there was "strong" evidence that it was effective.
However, it said there were still questions to be answered about how it is used on a wide scale across England.
Large-scale trial
Its trial on at least 10,000 people will try to figure out how to get the drugs to the right people, how popular it would be and for how long they would take Prep.
Dr Ian Williams, chairman of NHS England's group on HIV, said: "This announcement demonstrates NHS England's commitment to fund Prep and provides the chance to best prepare England for optimal roll-out following this large-scale clinical trial.
"For now, the trial will provide access to Prep for thousands of people most at risk of acquiring HIV."
Men who have sex with men are one of the groups at the highest risk of contracting HIV.
In London, one in eight gay men has HIV, while the proportion in the rest of the UK is one in 26.
'This is about saving lives'
Harry Dodd
Image caption
Harry Dodd says taking Prep has still not become socially acceptable
Harry Dodd, 25, is one of about 500 homosexual men in England who are taking Prep as part of a trial called Proud.
He says: "I've seen the panic on the face of previous boyfriends when they are awaiting their [HIV test] results - it's a huge fear and it affects everything you do.
"To be able to have sex without having that fear hanging over you all the time is huge."
Harry says taking Prep has still not become socially acceptable.
"Too many people seem to think it will encourage a hedonistic lifestyle, but for me this is about saving lives," he says.
"People reacted with cynicism when the contraceptive pill for women was first introduced.
"For me, taking Prep has helped me to trust again, have relationships and build bridges and that shouldn't be taken away."
Read more on Harry's story
Dr Michael Brady, medical director of the Terrence Higgins Trust, said the evidence on Prep was "overwhelming" but the new trial could help understand how it will work in real life.
He added: "However, we do still need answers to many questions about the trial, in terms of how exactly the trial will work in practice, how those at risk will be able to access Prep, no matter where they live, and what will happen after the trial."
Deborah Gold, chief executive of the National Aids Trust, said: "We are absolutely delighted that following our wins in court, NHS England, working with Public Health England and local government, will be now making Prep available on a large scale, and quickly, to those who need it."
The NHS in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland have not yet made a decision on Prep.
Related Topics
Medical research
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Giving healthy gay men HIV drugs 'could help reverse epidemic'
14 January 2016
HIV campaigners win NHS drug battle
2 August 2016
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Young men and women on the beach
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
6 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
striking doctors
Striking doctors tear-gassed in Nairobi
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Striking doctors tear-gassed in Nairobi
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Lottery millionaire: 'I thought I had won £2.40'
Lottery millionaire: 'I thought I had won £2.40'
 Nottinghamshire school swamped by teddies for Uganda
Nottinghamshire school swamped by teddies for Uganda
 Gun-wielding student at Utah school disarmed by his mum
Gun-wielding student at Utah school disarmed by his mum
 Storm Desmond flood report published
Storm Desmond flood report published
 Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
 Raised in the UK but 'blocked' from going to university
Raised in the UK but 'blocked' from going to university
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
BBC News
Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 Rotherham man jailed for 'hideous' child sex offences
BBC News
Rotherham man jailed for 'hideous' child sex offences
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
From Angelina Jolie to Liza Minnelli: The Most Famous Actors With Famous Parents
From Angelina Jolie to Liza Minnelli: The Most Famous…
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Celebrity Couples That Ruled Hollywood
The Celebrity Couples That Ruled Hollywood
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Ranked from Best to Last
U.S. Presidents Ranked from Best to Last
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Ranking the Most Dangerous Countries in the World
Ranking the Most Dangerous Countries in the…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
