
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
selected
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Asia
selected
China
India
selected
ADVERTISEMENT
India politician J Jayalalitha dies at 68
1 hour ago
 From the section India
Share

Media captionA look back at the career of J Jayalalitha
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, has died at 68.
The chief minister of Tamil Nadu state suffered a heart attack on Sunday night and died at 23:30 local time (18:00 GMT) on Monday, Chennai's Apollo Hospital said.
Thousands of her supporters had gathered to pray for her recovery.
Extra police have been deployed in the southern state amid fears of unrest among her supporters.
The former film star served as Tamil Nadu chief minister four times. She had been receiving treatment for months.
Jayalalitha is revered by many but seen by her critics as having created a cult of personality over the years.
Obituary: Jayaram Jayalalitha
The 'goddess' of Tamil Nadu politics
The women who rule India
There are fears her death could spark unrest given the extreme devotion she inspires among her supporters, many of whom refer to her as "Amma" (mother).
Earlier reports of her death, which were swiftly withdrawn, prompted scuffles between police and her supporters outside the private hospital.
Supporters of J Jayalalitha cry outside a hospital in Chennai, India. Photo: 6 December 2016Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Thousands of Jayalalitha's supporters gathered to mourn outside the Apollo hospital
Jayalalitha's supporters run beside an ambulance carrying her body in Chennai. Photo: 6 December 2016Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Some ran beside an ambulance carrying her body out of the hospital
Indian police stop a woman trying to break a police cordon in Chennai. Photo: 6 December 2016Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Extra police have been deployed in Chennai and across the state amid fears of unrest
Tributes began to pour in for Jayalalitha as soon as her death was confirmed by Apollo, which had been treating her since 22 September.
Jayalalitha's party AIADMK - which had earlier lowered the flag to half-mast before hoisting it up once more - also confirmed she had died, tweeting "our beloved leader, the Iron lady of India... Amma, is no more".
Wailing crowds: Sanjoy Majumder, BBC News, outside Apollo hospital
Indian supporters of the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu Jayalalitha react outside the hospital after false reports that she had died in ChennaiImage copyrightAFP
Image caption
A false report of her death earlier in the day prompted an outpouring of grief among supporters
Hundreds of people had lined the streets leading out of the hospital, despite it being long past midnight, to catch a last glimpse of the woman they called "Amma".
As the ambulance carrying her body emerged from the main gate, a cry went up as supporters jostled forward to try and get close to the vehicle - almost breaking the police line in the process. Many of them were wailing.
Her successor as chief minister, the entire cabinet, top officials and others followed. One woman sat on the ground, distraught, her cheeks streaked with tears.
Now the action has moved to Poes Garden, the neighbourhood which has been Jayalalitha's home for the past several decades.
The streets have been barricaded as people throng the narrow lanes for an all-night vigil.
A senior AIADMK politician, O Panneerselvam, was sworn in as chief of Tamil Nadu within hours of her death, the party's Twitter account confirmed.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi was among the first to offer his condolences.
"I will always cherish the innumerable occasions when I had the opportunity to interact with Jayalalithaa ji (honorific). May her soul rest in peace," he tweeted.
Khushboo Sundar, film actress and Congress party spokesperson, told the BBC: "It's very painful for me. Despite our political differences, I had respected her. We were hoping against hope, none of us wanted her to lose this battle.
"She was a symbol of strength for women like me. She fought against so many odds to make a name for herself in a male-dominated profession like politics. We have a lost a great politician, and a great champion of women's rights."
A supporter of Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Jayalalitha Jayaraman holds her photo at the AIADMK party office in Mumbai, India, December 5Image copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
A police raid in the 1990s found 10,500 saris and 750 pairs of shoes in Jayalalitha's home
Jayalalitha lived a dramatic life, both on screen and off.
She appeared in more than 100 films before turning her hand to politics in the early 1980s.
Jayalalitha later won control of the AIADMK from its late founder's wife, before leading it to victory in 1991, the first of four occasions she would do so.
She was accused of corruption on several occasions, and spent two short spells in prison - most recently in 2014.
But a Karnataka high court order in 2015, which cleared her of involvement in a corruption scandal, paved the way for her return to power.
Jayalalitha's admirers remain unbowed in their admiration for her and argue she has played a key role in the development of Tamil Nadu as one of India's most economically influential states.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Jayalalitha: The photograph 'ruling' an Indian state
25 October 2016
J Jayalalitha: Why ailing leader has Indian state on edge
7 October 2016
The women who rule India
16 May 2011
India
Ranveer Singh and Vaani Kapoor
Video
2:34
Video 2:34
Bollywood star on racy scenes
5 December 2016
 From the section India
Full article Bollywood star on racy scenes
The cash crunch has hit the rural economy hard
Video
Video
An Indian village goes back to bartering
5 December 2016
 From the section India
Full article An Indian village goes back to bartering
Keyframe #1
Video
Video
The Indian YouTube channel with 6 billion views
2 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article The Indian YouTube channel with 6 billion views
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
 'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Lubenham glider crash: Aircraft wreckage removed from field
Lubenham glider crash: Aircraft wreckage removed from field
 Bollywood's Ranveer Singh on racy scenes
Bollywood's Ranveer Singh on racy scenes
 100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
BBC News
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
 Jayalalitha: The 'goddess' of Tamil Nadu politics
BBC News
Jayalalitha: The 'goddess' of Tamil Nadu politics
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 Is it rude to recline your seat?
BBC Autos
Is it rude to recline your seat?
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Dassault Systemes
Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Citi's Head of North American Private Banking on How to Close a Deal
Citi's Head of North American Private Banking on How…
Citi Blog
The Most Successful People are Those Who Embrace Change
The Most Successful People are Those Who…
Citi Blog
We Ranked Every Meryl Streep Movie From Worst to First
We Ranked Every Meryl Streep Movie From Worst to First
PrettyFamous
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Most
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Most
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
우주인으로부터의 메시지
우주인(ET)과 지구인과의 관계에 대한 궁금증을 풀어보세요.
ko.rael.org
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
