BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
selected
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Asia
selected
China
India
Japan earthquake sparks tsunami advisory near Fukushima
1 hour ago
 From the section Asia
Share

Media captionJapanese broadcaster NHK World reported that people should evacuate immediately
A 7.4 magnitude earthquake off north-eastern Japan near Fukushima prefecture has prompted a tsunami advisory.
The quake struck on Tuesday morning at about 06:00 local time (21:00 GMT Monday), the Japan Meteorological Agency said.
Residents were asked to seek higher ground immediately. There were reports of minor injuries.
In 2011, an earthquake and tsunami struck the same area killing thousands and destroying parts of the coastline.
The depth of the quake was estimated to be 30km (18.6 miles), the agency said.
The initial tsunami warning of possible 3m (10ft) waves was downgraded to an advisory just before 10:00 local time.
The BBC's Rupert Wingfield-Hayes in Tokyo says tens of thousands of people have heeded evacuation warnings and headed for higher ground.
A tsunami advisory was also issued for Miyagi prefecture, where a 1.4m wave was observed at Sendai port.
A traffic jam is seen as people evacuate after tsunami advisories were issued following an earthquake, in IwakiImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
The evacuation order caused early morning traffic jams
A 1m wave hit the coastline near the Fukushima nuclear power plant, which was severely damaged by the 2011 quake and tsunami, the AFP news agency said.
Tokyo Electric Power has been checking the plant for damage from the latest quake.
Cabinet Chief Secretary Yoshihide Suga said at a televised news conference that the water cooling system on the third reactor of the Fukushima plant had stopped working, but there were no signs of damage and no other abnormalities at other nuclear facilities.
The plant operator later said it had restarted the cooling system, and reported only small temperature increases, within safety limits.
More than 18,000 people were killed or reported missing following the 2011 Fukushima disaster. The nuclear meltdown contaminated the surrounding area, displacing at least 100,000 people from their homes.
All reactors in the Fukushima nuclear plant were shut down following the 2011 disaster, but cooling is still needed for the used nuclear fuel stored on the site.
The Fukushima nuclear plant in Japan, 18 November 2016Image copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
The tsunami warning was issued for an area including the site of the Fukushima nuclear plant
The US Geological Survey initially put the magnitude of Tuesday's earthquake at 7.3 but later downgraded this to 6.9, lower than the number given by the Japanese authorities.
Damage from the quake remains unclear. Tremors were felt in Tokyo and our correspondent says buildings in the capital shook for at least 30 seconds.
Ships could be seen moving away from harbours in Fukushima prefecture, and car manufacturer Nissan suspended work at its Fukushima engine factory.
Map showing location of Fukushima
A wave of 60cm (2ft) has arrived in Onahama Port in Fukushima, Japanese broadcaster NHK reported, and another of 90cm in Soma.
The warnings were downgraded after four hours, but locals were asked to continue evacuating the area and to avoid the coastline.
Meanwhile, New Zealand authorities reported on Tuesday that an earthquake of 5.6 magnitude and 30km depth hit an area 200km north east of the capital Wellington. There were no immediate reports of deaths or injuries.
Japan lies in a particularly seismically active region and accounts for around 20% of quakes worldwide of magnitude 6.0 or more.
At least 50 people died in two quakes in the southern Kumamoto prefecture in April.
Have you been affected by the earthquake? If it is safe to do so, you can share your experience by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also contact us in the following ways:
WhatsApp: +44 7525 900971
Send pictures/video to yourpics@bbc.co.uk
Upload your pictures / video here
Tweet: @BBC_HaveYourSay
Text an SMS or MMS to 61124 (UK) or +44 7624 800 100 (international)
Or use the form below
Your contact details
Name

Your E-mail address (required)

Town & Country

Your telephone number

Comments (required)

If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on. In some cases a selection of your comments will be published, displaying your name as you provide it and location, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published. When sending us pictures, video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others, take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws. Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions.
Terms and conditions
Send
Related Topics
Japan
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Can you earthquake-proof a city?
24 March 2016
Is Fukushima's exclusion zone doing more harm than radiation?
10 March 2016
Japan earthquake: Powerful new tremor in Kumamoto
16 April 2016
Image gallery New Zealand quake: The geological impact of a 'complex' tremor
18 November 2016
Asia
Protesters in Washington
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
21 November 2016
 From the section India
Full article The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
An injured victim of the Kabul mosque suicide bombing is carried to hospital, 21 November 2016
Kabul mosque suicide attack kills dozens
21 November 2016
 From the section Asia
Full article Kabul mosque suicide attack kills dozens
 
More Videos from the BBC
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 The colours of my skin don't define me
The colours of my skin don't define me
 How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
 100 Women 2016: Aleppo nurse on life in a war zone
100 Women 2016: Aleppo nurse on life in a war zone
 Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Asteroid strike made 'instant Himalayas'
BBC News
Asteroid strike made 'instant Himalayas'
 Michelle Obama 'ape in heels' post causes outrage
BBC News
Michelle Obama 'ape in heels' post causes outrage
 German poster of Baroque old master 'too disturbing'
BBC News
German poster of Baroque old master 'too disturbing'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Australia’s hypersonic plane for a new space race
BBC Future
Australia’s hypersonic plane for a new space race
 Is this a photo or a painting?
BBC Culture
Is this a photo or a painting?
 The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
BBC Culture
The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
42 minutes ago
Earthquake sparks Japan tsunami advisory
1 hour ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
5
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
8
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
9
The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
10
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
 
From Around the Web
 How Old Are the Most Famous Actors?
How Old Are the Most Famous Actors?
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Hollywood Stars From Each State
Hollywood Stars From Each State
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
16 Hypoallergenic Dogs That Won't Make You Sneeze
16 Hypoallergenic Dogs That Won't Make You Sneeze
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Strong earthquake hits northern Japan
Strong earthquake hits northern Japan
Nikkei Asian Review
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
Trending: Top 10 Baby Names in Each State in 2015
Trending: Top 10 Baby Names in Each State in 2015
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
