
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
selected
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Asia
selected
China
India
ADVERTISEMENT
John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
By Hywel Griffith
BBC News, Sydney
5 December 2016
 From the section Asia
Share
Malcolm Turnbull and John Key in kayaks in Sydney (Feb 2016)Image copyright@JOHNKEY
Australia's Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said his response to the resignation of his New Zealand counterpart was a text message: "Say it ain't so, bro."
After sharing kayaking trips around Sydney harbour in February and late-night summit dinners, the political bromance between the two prime ministers is coming to an end.
John Key's surprise resignation may have caught the Kiwi media off guard, but his opposite number across the Tasman Sea claims to have known what was coming.
"I have to say his announcement didn't come as a complete surprise to me," Malcolm Turnbull told the media.
"He has gone," he said, "when he is on top. He is a class act, none classier."
Profile: From banker to three-term PM
Resignation 'changes the political game'
The praise heaped on Mr Key by his Canberra counterpart reflects the political, centre-right bond the two men share.
Both have a background in business and finance, and both have sought to bring those deal-making skills to the political arena.
But Mr Turnbull's words may reveal a little envy too.
New Zealand Prime Minister John Key (foreground) speaking as Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull looks on at a media conference in Sydney, Australia. 19 February 2016.Image copyrightEPA
Image caption
Mr Turnbull would have reason to feel envious of his friend's position
While Mr Key gets to decide when to draw his eight-year term to an end, Australian politics has a far more frenetic pace, having chewed its way through four prime ministers since 2008.
Mr Turnbull is currently suffering poor approval ratings and holds the slimmest possible parliamentary majority, which means much of his time is spent answering questions about possible leadership challenges.
Conversely, Mr Key's position seemed rock-solid, with his relative longevity in the post making him more popular.
"He has undertaken big reforms in New Zealand," Mr Turnbull noted, "but he has been able to do so and maintain strong popular support".

Media captionJohn Key: "It's the right time for me to come home"
Very few politicians get to choose the timing of their exit in this way, something Malcolm Turnbull clearly appreciates.
But like many relationships, this one will end with some unfinished business.
John Key was one of the architects of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) - a deal which, it was claimed, could bring huge benefits to Australia.
It is significant that one of the biggest trade agreements ever was signed in Auckland, with Mr Key hosting other world leaders.
US President-elect Donald Trump's rejection of the TPP means that part of his legacy has collapsed in the last few weeks.
It will be left to New Zealand's new leader to work out with the other signatories if the TPP can be of any benefit without US involvement.
In his resignation speech, Mr Key said his wife Bronagh had spent many nights and weekends alone without him.
In resigning, he is returning to her side. But he may still get the occasional call from his Canberra "bro", asking for advice on how to hold on to power.
Related Topics
New Zealand
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

John Key resignation 'changes New Zealand political game'
5 December 2016
Profile: From banker to PM
5 December 2016
New Zealand Prime Minister John Key in surprise resignation
5 December 2016
Video Key's emotional resignation speech
5 December 2016
TPP: What is it and why does it matter?
22 November 2016
Asia
An undated photograph showing Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Jayalalitha Jayaraman during a public event in Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
6 December 2016
 From the section India
Full article Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
Australia flag flip flip
Alternative Australia Day event banned
5 December 2016
 From the section Australia
Full article Alternative Australia Day event banned
Pearl Harbour attack
Japan PM to make first Pearl Harbor visit
5 December 2016
 From the section Asia
Full article Japan PM to make first Pearl Harbor visit
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Former youth football coach Hugh Stevenson accused of child abuse
Former youth football coach Hugh Stevenson accused of child abuse
 Mystery of lost wedding snaps found in old camera is solved
Mystery of lost wedding snaps found in old camera is solved
 Carmarthen taxi driver suspended for refusing woman with MS
Carmarthen taxi driver suspended for refusing woman with MS
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
 Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
BBC News
Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
 Eddie Izzard's homophobic attacker given suspended sentence
BBC News
Eddie Izzard's homophobic attacker given suspended sentence
 Ex-judge and husband admit forging will to inherit cottages
BBC News
Ex-judge and husband admit forging will to inherit cottages
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 A museum of 500,000 oddities
BBC Travel
A museum of 500,000 oddities
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 A 2016 picture showing Vera Sommerfeld, 96, with her adult descendants - and the sixth generation, newborn baby Callie.
Six generations
Great-great-great grandmother gets ready for Christmas
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
Our Power-Hungry World Needs Cleaner Energy – But From Where?
Our Power-Hungry World Needs Cleaner Energy –…
Dassault Systemes
Indian City Sees Robust Investment in Solar Energy
Indian City Sees Robust Investment in Solar Energy
Citi Blog
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make the List?
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB Team
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Actress the Same Age as You
The Most Famous Actress the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
성서 히브리어를 배우세요
온라인 성서 히브리어 강좌를 통해 성경을 온전히 이해해 보세요!
eteacherbiblical.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
