BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FOOTBALL
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Live Scores
Results
Fixtures
Tables
Gossip
All Teams
Leagues & Cups
European
Women
African
Predictor
Jurgen Klinsmann: United States sack former Germany boss

6 hours ago From the section Football
Share this page
 Jurgen Klinsmann
Jurgen Klinsmann led Germany to third place at the 2006 World Cup
Former Germany player and boss Jurgen Klinsmann has been sacked as coach of the United States.

The 52-year-old, who won the World Cup as a player with Germany in 1990, took over as US boss in 2011.

"We remain confident we have quality players to help us advance to Russia 2018," said US Soccer president Sunil Gulati.

"But the form and growth of the team up to this point left us convinced that we need to go in a different direction."

Klinsmann steered the United States to the last 16 at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil after finishing above Portugal in their group.

However, they lost 2-1 at home to Mexico and 4-0 away to Costa Rica in their opening two qualifying matches for the 2018 tournament.

The US are pointless and bottom of the six-country qualifying group, below the likes of Panama and Honduras, albeit only a fifth of the way through the qualifying process.

"With the next qualifying match in late March, we have several months to refocus," added Gulati.

"We need to determine the best way forward to ensure a successful journey to qualify for our eighth consecutive World Cup."

Former Tottenham striker Klinsmann was linked with the England job after Sam Allardyce left his post in September.

Analysis: 'Rift proved Klinsmann's downfall'

USA Today sports correspondent Martin Rodgers on BBC Radio 5 live:

Klinsmann has had some decent results as US head coach but ultimately too many setbacks and this was the time to pull the plug.

It now looks like Bruce Arena, the former US coach, most recently of LA Galaxy, will take over. Arena was head coach between 1998 and 2006 and maybe it is time to go back and do things the American way.

I think it's an admission that the experiment with Klinsmann didn't work. Everyone remembers what he did with Germany in 2006 and the free flowing and attacking football they played.

People expected him to come in and do the same with the US. The problem is the US is not blessed with the same kind of players as that Germany squad - or any Germany squad.

That's really where the downfall came. The way Klinsmann wanted to play, the players he had couldn't play that way.

It created tension within the camp and it created a little bit of a rift between some of the German-American players he had brought in and some of the more traditional American players.
Share this page
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Related to this story

Heavy USA defeat 'hurts' Klinsmann

5d
Read more on Costa Rica 4-0 USA: Jurgen Klinsmann hurt by worst qualifying defeat in 36 years
Mexico claim dramatic win over USA

9d From the section Football
Read more on USA v Mexico: Visitors claim dramatic 2-1 win in 2018 World Cup qualifier
Bradley at Swansea 'fantastic' - Klinsmann

5 Oct From the section Football
Read more on Bob Bradley: Swansea appointment fantastic, says Jurgen Klinsmann
Premier League Predictor: Play now

6 Aug
Read more on Premier League Predictor: Play now

 
From Around the Web
 The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the List?
The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the List?
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to remove Park
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to remove Park
Nikkei Asian Review
The Cities With the Most Car Accidents
The Cities With the Most Car Accidents
@GraphiqHQ
16 Hypoallergenic Dogs That Won't Make You Sneeze
16 Hypoallergenic Dogs That Won't Make You Sneeze
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Hollywood Stars From Each State
Hollywood Stars From Each State
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Who is the Most Famous Actor Your Age?
Who is the Most Famous Actor Your Age?
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
BBC Sport features
Football alerts, newsletters and social media
Get latest scores and headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Gossip column logo
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.
5 live's football daily podcast
Commentaries, clips and podcasts
Enjoy the best debate, analysis and interviews with 5 live and World Service football plus our commentary listings.
Women playing football
How to get into Football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
