BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 HORSE RACING
IN ASSOCIATION WITH 
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Horse Racing
UK/Ireland Results
World Results
Calendar
ADVERTISEMENT

Liam Treadwell: Jockey on his return from concussion and his 'famous gnashers'

	
By Cornelius Lysaght
BBC horse racing correspondent
From the section Horse Racing
Share this page
 Liam Treadwell
Treadwell won at the Cheltenham Festival on Carrickboy in 2013
Liam Treadwell's teeth helped to make him one of the best known Grand National-winning jockeys of recent years, and those celebrated gnashers have again played a significant role in his life.

Famously, in a BBC television interview after his 2009 Aintree success on 100-1 shot Mon Mome, Treadwell flashed a gap-toothed smile prompting interviewer Clare Balding to comment: "He hasn't got the best [teeth] in the world - but you can afford to go and get them 'done' now."

Though the jockey took no offence - and ended up laughing all the way to a free dental makeover - Balding apologised for the remark, which became one of the sporting stories of that year.

ADVERTISEMENT


Now as he relaunches a riding career put on hold for six months by the side effects of "cumulative" concussion which made him fear for his future in the saddle, Treadwell, 30, says rewatching the incident, dubbed 'Col-gate' at the time, aided his return.

He said: "The symptoms of concussion probably wore off after six weeks or two months, but I was mentally not very well and my brain was still a bit fragile when I exercised. If I ran 100 yards down the road, I felt like I'd been clobbered round the head.

"I didn't want to ride a horse as I felt so grim, so disillusioned, and I was shutting myself away, not talking to anyone; I wasn't diagnosed with depression, but in my own head, sitting on the sofa at home, I felt depressed.

"A sports psychologist encouraged me to watch the good days on TV - good times, successes, so Mon Mome and [2013 Cheltenham Festival winner] Carrickboy were two I watched and seeing Clare's comments about my teeth at Aintree definitely helped me to smile again."

Liam Treadwell
Treadwell celebrates before the moment dubbed 'Col-gate' in 2009
Chatting in the car park at Kempton, on a rain-drenched Monday in November ahead of taking his first mount since late May, the winner of more than 250 races looked out on the soaking scene and insisted: "After the six months I've had, I don't give a damn about the rain - I'm just very, very excited to be here."

Reflecting on his time on the sidelines, he told BBC Sport: "I'd had a big bang [fall] in March, and then came back and had a couple of 'soft' falls but wasn't feeling myself.

"I'd be sat at home at night and I'd drop in and out of the conversation randomly, and couldn't remember the details of what had been said, and I was feeling very tired.

"My wife Emily and [fellow jockey] Robbie Dunne, who was living with us at the time, said I needed to see someone, and she actually filmed it one evening, on the quiet, to show me to make the point.

"I had some basic tests at [the Injured Jockeys Fund's rehabilitation centre] Oaksey House and a chat for 40 minutes or an hour to them. When I left the room, I was so emotionally and mentally drained I felt I'd been 10 rounds with Mike Tyson - I thought 'God, I've got some issues'.

"As one month came and went, and another, of course I was worried about what the future was going to hold for me as a jockey."

With the support of Mon Mome's trainer Venetia Williams, his main employer, who ordered him to "take as long as you need", he embarked on a lengthy period of complete rest - "doing nothing, giving the brain a chance to heal" - mixed with regular visits to his psychologist.

Those visits are now due to continue, to help him to deal with what he sees as the "railroad life of a jockey", and he plans to encourage colleagues to make their own appointments.

Liam Treadwell
Treadwell's memories of victory on Mon Mome aided his recovery
"I'm going to be very open with the lads in the weighing room," he said, "and tell them being able to speak to a specialist is an important thing for any sportsman or woman, especially when they feel like I did that they've got the weight of the world on their shoulders.

"Racing may be behind other sports like cricket or rugby where it's commonplace.

"I feel fitter and stronger than I probably ever have been - I hope that can transfer into the saddle - and I've got my mind back in order; I have a better understanding of myself I think."

At Kempton, it looked as though a fairytale return was on the cards for Treadwell on the Venetia Williams-trained Uhlan Bute as the pair took the lead at the third to last fence in the two-and-a-half-mile handicap chase, only for the horse to unseat its rider at the next with the race apparently at their mercy.

Despite the tumble, a smile - of perfectly aligned teeth - lit up the gloom. Nothing was going to disrupt the sheer delight of being back.
Share this page
Find out more

BBC: Latest racing results

Read more on BBC: Latest racing results
Cornelius Lysaght on Twitter

Read more on Cornelius Lysaght on Twitter
British Horseracing Authority

Read more on British Horseracing Authority
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Related to this story

National winner Mon Mome retired

2 Apr 2013 From the section Horse Racing
Read more on Grand National: Mon Mome, 100-1 winner in 2009, is retired
Mon Mome seals shock National win

4 Apr 2009
Read more on Mon Mome seals shock National win
Mystique returns to greatest race

5 Apr 2009
Read more on Mystique returns to greatest race
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
