
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Four major cities move to ban diesel vehicles by 2025
By Matt McGrath
Environment correspondent
2 December 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Paris pollutionImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Air quality in Paris has forced political leaders to take a hard stance on the use of diesel
The leaders of four major global cities say they will stop the use of all diesel-powered cars and trucks by the middle of the next decade.
The mayors of Paris, Mexico City, Madrid and Athens say they are implementing the ban to improve air quality.
They say they will give incentives for alternative vehicle use and promote walking and cycling.
The commitments were made in Mexico at a biennial meeting of city leaders.
The use of diesel in transport has come under increasing scrutiny in recent years, as concerns about its impact on air quality have grown. The World Health Organization (WHO) says that around three million deaths every year are linked to exposure to outdoor air pollution.
Europe pollution 'kills 467,000 a year'
Diesel cars: What's all the fuss about?
London air quality alerts announced
Diesel engines contribute to the problem in two key ways - through the production of particulate matter (PM) and nitrogen oxides (NOx). Very fine soot PM can penetrate the lungs and can contribute to cardiovascular illness and death.
Nitrogen oxides can help form ground level ozone and this can exacerbate breathing difficulties, even for people without a history of respiratory problems.
As the evidence has mounted, environmental groups have used the courts to try and enforce clear air standards and regulations. In the UK, campaigners have recently had success in forcing the government to act more quickly.
Now, mayors from a number of major cities with well known air quality problems have decided to use their authority to clamp down on the use of diesel.
In the UK, campaigners are calling for London's mayor to commit to phase out diesel vehicles from London by 2025.
Sadiq Khan has proposed an expansion to the planned Ultra-Low Emission Zone in central London.
ClientEarth lawyer Alan Andrews said: "In the UK, London's mayor is considering bolder action than his predecessor, proposing an expansion to the planned Ultra-Low Emission Zone. This is welcome but we want him to go further and faster.
"And it's not just London that has this problem, we need a national network of clean air zones so that the problem is not simply pushed elsewhere."
Analysis
madridImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Madrid will ban diesel-powered vehicles from 2025
By Roger Harrabin, BBC environment analyst
The diesel ban is hugely significant. Carmakers will look at this decision and know it's just a matter of time before other city mayors follow suit.
The history of vehicle manufacture shows that firms that do not keep up with environmental improvements will fail in a global market. The biggest shapers of automobile design are not carmakers, but rulemakers.
There is already a rush to improve electric and hydrogen cars and hybrids. That will now become a stampede.
There is an ironic twist to this. Governments originally promoted diesel vehicles because they produce fewer of the CO2 emissions that are increasing climate change.
But manufacturers misled governments about their ability to clean up the local pollution effects, so now diesel vehicles are being banned to clean up local air.
In their place will come electric and hydrogen vehicles, which are perfect for climate policy, if the power comes from renewables. Strange world.
Follow Roger on Twitter @rharrabin
At the C40 meeting of urban leaders in Mexico, the four mayors declared that they would ban all diesel vehicles by 2025 and "commit to doing everything in their power to incentivise the use of electric, hydrogen and hybrid vehicles".
"It is no secret that in Mexico City, we grapple with the twin problems of air pollution and traffic," said the city's mayor, Miguel Ángel Mancera.
"By expanding alternative transportation options like our Bus Rapid Transport and subway systems, while also investing in cycling infrastructure, we are working to ease congestion in our roadways and our lungs."
Paris has already taken a series of steps to cut the impact of diesel cars and trucks. Vehicles registered before 1997 have already been banned from entering the city, with restrictions increasing each year until 2020.
Once every month, the Champs-Élysées is closed to traffic, while very recently a 3km (1.8m) section of the right bank of the Seine river that was once a two-lane motorway, has been pedestrianised.
"Our city is implementing a bold plan - we will progressively ban the most polluting vehicles from the roads, helping Paris citizens with concrete accompanying measures," said Anne Hidalgo, the city's mayor.
"Our ambition is clear and we have started to roll it out: we want to ban diesel from our city, following the model of Tokyo, which has already done the same."
Many of the measures being proposed to cut air pollution have a knock-on benefit of curbing the emissions that exacerbate global warming as well.
"The quality of the air that we breathe in our cities is directly linked to tackling climate change," said the mayor of Madrid, Manuela Carmena.
"As we reduce the greenhouse gas emissions generated in our cities, our air will become cleaner and our children, our grandparents and our neighbours will be healthier."
Many of the plans outlined by the mayors meeting in Mexico are already having a positive impact.
In Barcelona, extra journeys by publicly available bicycles have reduced the CO2 emissions by over 9,000 tonnes - the equivalent of more than 21 million miles driven by an average vehicle.
Follow Matt on Twitter and on Facebook
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Diesel cars: What's all the fuss about?
16 September 2015
Mayor of London Sadiq Khan issues air quality alerts across capital
1 December 2016
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Chernobyl shield completion like 'closing a nuclear wound'
Chernobyl shield completion like 'closing a nuclear wound'
 How alpacas keep turkey off foxes' menus
How alpacas keep turkey off foxes' menus
 'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
 'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Sympathy for Ohio campus attacker's 'pain' triggers fury
BBC News
Sympathy for Ohio campus attacker's 'pain' triggers fury
 Trump-Taiwan call breaks US policy stance
BBC News
Trump-Taiwan call breaks US policy stance
 In pictures: Living near the Arctic Circle
BBC News
In pictures: Living near the Arctic Circle
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
 The Rolls-Royce 'high-sided vehicle' comes into focus
BBC Autos
The Rolls-Royce 'high-sided vehicle' comes into focus
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
How to Decide Between a Car With an Automatic or Manual Gearbox
How to Decide Between a Car With an Automatic or…
Men's Fitness
10 Best Road Bikes For Serious Cyclists
10 Best Road Bikes For Serious Cyclists
Men's Fitness
Most Thrilling Motorcycle Ride on Earth
Most Thrilling Motorcycle Ride on Earth
Muscle and Fitness
Meet the World's Strongest Man
Meet the World's Strongest Man
Muscle and Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
