BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FORMULA 1
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Results
Standings
Race Calendar
Gossip
Teams
Drivers
McLaren: Zak Brown accepts role after Ron Dennis' departure

	
By Andrew Benson
Chief F1 writer
9 hours ago From the section Formula 1
Share this page
 Ron Dennis
Ron Dennis has run the McLaren team since 1981
Formula 1 commercial expert Zak Brown will join the McLaren Group as executive director next month, following the departure of Ron Dennis.

Brown will take on the position after Dennis was last week put on gardening leave by fellow shareholders pending the end of his contract in January.

The 45-year-old American rejected a senior position at F1's owners Liberty Media in order to accept the job.

"I'm immensely proud to be joining McLaren Technology Group," he said.

Who is Zak Brown?
1971: Born 7 November in Los Angeles, California
1991: Begins racing in Formula Ford 1600 in UK. Wins one race
1995: Competes in British Formula Three; establishes Just Marketing International (JMI)
1997-98: Races in German Formula Three
1999-2000: Races in American Le Mans Series
2009: Creates United Autosports sports car racing team
2013: JMI acquired by CSM Sport & Entertainment
September 2016: Resigns as chairman of JMI
"I have the utmost respect and admiration for what the business has achieved to date, and I look forward to contributing to the next important phase in its development," Brown said in a statement.

"Having worked closely with McLaren for many years, I've been struck by the talent and ambition of the entire workforce, and I very much look forward to complementing the business' many existing strengths, and building on them to drive future success."

Dennis, 69, remains chairman and chief executive officer but following the collapse of his relationship with the other shareholders he is no longer actively engaged in running the company, although he remains a board member by virtue of his shareholding.

Dennis owns 25% of McLaren, with Bahrain's Mumtalakat sovereign investment fund having 50% and Saudi-born French businessman Mansour Ojjeh the remaining 25%.

Ojjeh and the Bahrainis forced Dennis out of the company last week after a breakdown in their relationship.

Dennis is reportedly considering whether to launch a legal action against his fellow shareholders but has already lost one bid in the High Court in which he attempted to prevent being placed on gardening leave.

Brown, who will be responsible for racing and marketing in his new position, was revealed as a major contender for a role running McLaren by BBC Sport last month and decided over the weekend to accept their offer.

McLaren to appoint Zak Brown
Brown has helped facilitate sponsorship deals for McLaren in his role with JMI
He was of particular interest to McLaren because of his success in finding sponsors for a number of teams in his former role at Just Marketing International (JMI).

"As founder of JMI - now the world's largest motorsport marketing agency - I've often worked closely with McLaren and I've developed some excellent relationships across the company," he added.

"Together we've delivered some great sponsorship deals, including Johnnie Walker, GSK, Hilton, Lenovo, Chandon and NTT.

"In my new role I'll be able to combine my absolute passion with my unparalleled area of expertise - respectively motorsport and marketing - while ensuring the two stay totally aligned."

McLaren have not had a title sponsor since parting company with mobile phone company Vodafone at the end of 2013 and Dennis' failure in that respect was among the reasons for him being forced out.

He also fell out with Ojjeh, a former friend and business partner for more than three decades, some years ago and the pair have since failed to patch up their relationship.
Share this page
Find out more

BBC F1 Twitter

Read more on BBC F1 Twitter
BBC Sport Facebook

Read more on BBC Sport Facebook
BBC Sport Twitter

Read more on BBC Sport Twitter
Formula 1

Read more on Formula 1
FIA

Read more on FIA
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Related to this story

McLaren boss Dennis forced to quit

6d From the section Formula 1
Read more on Ron Dennis: McLaren boss ends his 35-year tenure
McLaren's Dennis loses High Court bid

10d From the section Formula 1
Read more on Ron Dennis: McLaren chairman fails with High Court bid
Surprise name emerges to replace Dennis

25 Oct From the section Formula 1
Read more on McLaren: Zak Brown is surprise name in frame to replace Ron Dennis
 
From Around the Web
 Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
Famous for Being Awful: The 39 Worst Movies of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Japan to offer 1-year path to permanent residency
Japan to offer 1-year path to permanent residency
Nikkei Asian Review
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of addicted players!
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of…
Soldiers
25 Names Nobody Wants for Their Kid Anymore
25 Names Nobody Wants for Their Kid Anymore
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
US Presidents: Poorest to Richest
US Presidents: Poorest to Richest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The most addictive game of the year! Play with 14 million Players now!
The most addictive game of the year! Play with 14 million…
Forge Of Empires
Promoted content by Outbrain
Featured

Andrew Benson
Andrew Benson
Analysis and opinion from the BBC's chief Formula 1 writer.
Formula 1 gossip
Today's Formula 1 gossip column
 F1 composite image
BBC Sport's beginner's guide to F1
Here's BBC F1's explain-all guide for newcomers, plus how to get into motorsport and become an expert with our podcast, Chequered Flag
BBC Sport features
Formula 1 alerts, live guide and social media
Get the latest results and headlines sent straight to your phone, find all our Formula 1 coverage details with our Live Guide, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Explore the BBC

Metallica
Enter Metallica
Performing at Maida Vale for the first time ever with the session of all sessions!
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
