BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 GOLF
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Leaderboard
Calendar
Video
Men's Rankings
Women's Rankings
Rory McIlroy: Results in majors big disappointment of 2016

8 hours ago From the section Golf
Share this page
 Henrik Stenson and Rory McIlroy
Henrik Stenson and Rory McIlroy were playing partners on the final day of the DP World Tour Championship in Dubai
World number two Rory McIlroy will focus on ensuring he produces his best golf in the majors next season.

The 27-year-old admits his 2016 major efforts were a disappointment in what he feels was otherwise a good season.

McIlroy has also targeted Colin Montgomerie's money list record after watching Henrik Stenson succeed him as European number one on Sunday in Dubai.

"Next season I just need to make sure the majors match up to what I am doing outside of them," said McIlroy.

McIlroy, who has four majors to his name, failed to genuinely threaten to add to that tally in the year's four biggest events.

He recorded two top-10 finishes and two missed cuts in this year's majors and described his putting as "pathetic" after making an early exit from the US PGA for the first time in his career.

"My major championship performances haven't been what I wanted, but if you take the majors away I feel like I have played pretty well and had a good season," added the Tour Championship and overall FedEx Cup title winner.

He relinquished his European number one status to Open champion Stenson at the season-ending DP World Tour event at Jumeirah Estates over the weekend.

And the three-time European money list winner revealed he has the record eight titles of Scotsman Montgomerie in his sights.

"When you see someone do something you have done before and have not quite achieved this year, of course you want to do it again," said the Northern Irishman.

"I want to win the Race again, I have got a few more years and it would be nice to pass Monty.

"That will be a nice little target to aim for and hopefully I can get my fourth next year.

"I know if I win tournaments and play well in the big events that these things sort of happen in the process."
Share this page
Find out more

European Tour

Read more on European Tour
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Related to this story

Stenson secures Race to Dubai title

1d From the section Golf
Read more on Henrik Stenson seals Race to Dubai, Matthew Fitzpatrick wins Tour Championship
McIlroy wins to wrap up Race to Dubai

22 Nov 2015 From the section Golf
Read more on World Tour Championship: Rory McIlroy wins to wrap up Race to Dubai
McIlroy wins European Tour finale

25 Nov 2012 From the section Golf
Read more on Rory McIlroy wins DP World Tour Championship in Dubai

 
From Around the Web
 25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Child Anymore
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Child Anymore
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Muscle & Fitness
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of addicted players!
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of…
Soldiers
Here Are the 25 Presidents with the Lowest IQ Scores
Here Are the 25 Presidents with the Lowest IQ Scores
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Featured

Iain Carter
Iain Carter
Analysis and opinion from the BBC's golf correspondent.
BBC Sport features
Golf alerts, newsletters and social media
Get the latest golf headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Child playing golf
How to get into golf
From hitting a few balls on the range or a quick nine holes, to the full 18 and tournaments - how to get into golf.
Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg at the British Grand Prix
What's on BBC Sport this week
This week's sport on the BBC includes F1 and the season-ending Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, Champions League football and snooker's UK Championship.
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
