BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
Zika outbreak: The mosquito menace
By James Gallagher
Health editor, BBC News website
29 January 2016
 From the section Health Related TopicsZika virus outbreak
Share
MosquitoImage copyrightSPL
This blood sucker might not be your best friend, but it loves you.
The mosquito, Aedes aegypti, is causing widespread fear in Brazil where it is spreading the Zika virus that has been linked to thousands of babies being born with birth defects.
So what do we know about it?
Grey line
It loves our cities
This is not some jungle-dwelling insect that rarely comes into contact with people.
It is one of those animals, like cockroaches, pigeons and urban foxes, that thrives in built-up areas.
It does not need natural water sources to breed as it can lay eggs in the small and plentiful pools of stagnant water, such as gutters or flower pots, found in cities .
Mosquito larvaeImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Mosquito larvae thrive in stagnant water
Cities like Singapore have big problems with the mosquito.
Prof Uriel Kitron, from Emory University, said: "Aegypti is really adapted well for urban areas.
"It is becoming more and more of an urbanised world and aegypti thrives - Brazil is an extreme example going from 20% to 80% urban in 70 years."
There's also plenty of food - us.
Grey line
They harbour a bunch of diseases
DengueImage copyrightSPL
Image caption
Dengue fever is also spread by mosquitoes
Zika is currently getting all the attention, but Aedes aegypti has long been known as the yellow fever mosquito.
Yellow fever is a viral disease that can cause jaundice, bleeding and multiple organ failure in some cases.
And 390 million people are infected with the dengue virus each year, largely as a result of bites from Aedes aegypti.
Chikungunya, another virus causing alarm as it expands around the world, is also spread by the insects.
They do it by biting someone who is infected and then biting someone else.
Grey line
More on the Zika crisis:
Up to four million Zika cases predicted
What you need to know
Zika 'could become pandemic'
Video - WHO: 'Level of concern is high'
Video - How mums-to-be are tackling Zika
Grey line
Only the females bite and they love human blood
Zika virus cycle
Both the male and female mosquitoes feed off plant nectar. However, the females need a blood meal in order to produce eggs.
Two traits make them especially good at spreading disease.
First they feed almost exclusively on humans, so if they pick up a disease from one person, they are likely to pass it on with their next bite.
Other mosquitoes are less efficient spreaders as they feed off a variety of animals.
These particular blood suckers also drink little and often.
Rather than gorge their entire meal from one person and running the risk of being swatted they graze from multiple people making it easier to spread disease.
They are also active during the day so bed nets are less effective.
Grey line
It's a lazy hitch-hiker
MosquitoImage copyrightSPL
"They're amazing hitch-hikers, but they're lousy flyers," argues Prof Kitron.
The mosquitoes that carry malaria can fly for miles, but Aedes aegypti is pretty lazy by comparison.
It stays close to the area where it was born and 100m is a long way for it to fly.
Prof Kitron says: "But they're good at catching rides, their whole life cycle can take place in the water in a boat."
So despite its short flying distances it has managed to conquer the world.
Grey line
It has a cousin that could bring Zika to Europe
Aedes aegypti lives in tropical and subtropical climates - it is why experts are worried Zika could spread across the Americas, a huge swathe of Africa as well as India and China.
However, the similar Aedes albopictus - or Asian Tiger mosquito - likes cooler more temperate areas.
Map of the global distribution of Aedes mosquitoes
It has been linked to outbreaks of chikungunya virus in Italy and France.
There are suspicions that it could also spread Zika virus, but it is not yet clear.
Grey line
Out of Africa
Aedes aegypti exists in two forms or sub-species.
Aedes aegypti formosus is the original type found in Africa, which does not often come into contact with people and is not a major spreader of disease.
Aedes aegypti aegypti is the form that has spread around the world.
It probably arrived in the Americas from Africa after being transported around the ocean in the ships of European colonisers.
"Yellow fever outbreaks were known in Africa from around 1400 and the first confirmed cases, from the Yucatan, were documented in 1648," Dr Michael Bonsall from Oxford University said.
It is now found throughout tropical and subtropical regions around the globe.
Grey line
Killed off once before
FumingationImage copyrightSPL
Eradication campaigns were successful in the Americas with 18 countries getting rid of the insect by 1962.
But insecticide resistance plus a lack of political will led to the mosquito rebounding.
But now far more people live in its preferred urban home and a similar achievement would require a huge effort.
Follow James on Twitter.
Related Topics
Zika virus outbreakBabies & Toddlers
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Zika virus: Up to four million Zika cases predicted
28 January 2016
Zika outbreak: What you need to know
31 August 2016
Zika virus could become 'explosive pandemic'
28 January 2016
Brazilian city of Recife sees spike in microcephaly cases
28 January 2016
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Young men and women on the beach
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
6 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
HIV
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Political Week in 60 seconds in the East Midlands
Political Week in 60 seconds in the East Midlands
 Hawaii snow captured in time-lapse footage
Hawaii snow captured in time-lapse footage
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
 The Indian village that has returned to bartering
The Indian village that has returned to bartering
 Is UKIP now a threat to Labour seats in the North?
Is UKIP now a threat to Labour seats in the North?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Ireland and US sign extension of J1 visa scheme
BBC News
Ireland and US sign extension of J1 visa scheme
 Rotherham man jailed for 'hideous' child sex offences
BBC News
Rotherham man jailed for 'hideous' child sex offences
 Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
BBC News
Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 What it’s like to sail a giant ship on Earth’s busiest seas
BBC Future
What it’s like to sail a giant ship on Earth’s busiest seas
 Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
BBC Future
Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for Cleaner Energy
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for…
Dassault Systemes
The 25 Least Popular Dogs to Own
The 25 Least Popular Dogs to Own
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Hollywood Couples Ever
The Most Famous Hollywood Couples Ever
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
