BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
Australia
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
selected
US & Canada
Mosul battle: Remembering Iraqi special forces soldier 'Spongebob'
7 hours ago
 From the section Middle East
Share
Ahmed "Talqa" on patrol in IraqImage copyrightAYMAN OGHANNA
Islamic State

Battle for Mosul: The story so far
Islamic State group: The full story
Is so-called Islamic State finished?
Islamic State and the crisis in Iraq and Syria in maps
Photojournalist Ayman Oghanna has been embedded for weeks with an Iraqi special forces unit seeking to retake the city of Mosul from so-called Islamic State. Here, he recalls his time with a member of the unit who died in a bomb attack.
Ahmed "Talqa" was killed on Friday.
He hated that name. Talqa means "bullet" in Arabic and Ahmed preferred "SpongeBob" - the nickname given to him by his son because of his goofy, gap-toothed smile.
Ahmed's name cannot be printed in full because he is - sorry, was - a member of Iraq's elite Counter-Terrorism Service (CTS), more commonly known as the Golden Division, and it may endanger the rest of his family to do so.
That in itself is a telling fact about the state of Iraq more than 13 years after the US-led invasion.
Ahmed was involved in all of the wars of his generation and he was one of the bravest, kindest, funniest men I have known.
Ahmed 
Image caption
Ahmed with his son, who gave him the nickname "SpongeBob"
Ahmed's nom de guerre, Talqa, came from the slugs pulled out of him nearly a decade ago.
A Shia Muslim from Baghdad, Ahmed had been driving home one night when he was pulled over at a police checkpoint.
The federal police force had been so infiltrated by Shia militias at the time that it effectively was one - some say it still is.
The policemen at that checkpoint pulled Ahmed out of his car after checking his ID. Other men were waiting for him.
At the time, Shia militias had been targeting Iraqi special forces personnel in retaliation for carrying out raids against them throughout the capital and somehow they had got hold of Ahmed's name.

Media caption"We received a lot more fire from IS and their positions" - video journalist Ayman Oghanna
He was bundled into the boot of a car and driven to an abandoned warehouse where he was tortured. His ordeal began with both of his hands being nailed to a wooden board.
"I kept telling them that I didn't work with the Americans," Ahmed told me.
But they did not stop, pulling out each of his fingernails with a set of pliers and resuscitating him each time he passed out from the pain.
They then put a circular saw to his forehead. "They were trying to cut my face off - what's wrong with these people?"
Iraqi special forces personnel in Baghdad (13 August 2016)Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Iraq's Counter-Terrorism Service was set up by the US military after the 2003 invasion
Ahmed never confessed to being in the special forces.
A hood was placed over his head and he was shot five times. One bullet grazed his skull, causing blood to seep through the hood. The militiamen were convinced that he was dead.
They dumped his body on a rubbish dump in a Sunni Muslim area - a common practice during the sectarian war that peaked from 2006 to 2007 - as they sought to lay blame at the door of another community for murder and make it less likely the victim would get a decent burial.
Counter to the narrative of hatred, however, an elderly Sunni man carried Ahmed's body to the hospital.
Ahmed recovered. He tried to find and thank this kind stranger but he could not be found.
Hospital staff told him that after bringing in Ahmed the man had been grabbed by another set of Iraqi policemen, who blamed him for Ahmed's wounds.
There was no record of the man's arrest and he joins the untold thousands of Iraqis who have disappeared in the country's cycles of violence and revenge.
Ahmed Image copyrightAYMAN OGHANNA
Image caption
Mobile phone coverage in warzones can be notoriously patchy
Ahmed, the great survivor, was killed in Mosul when an IS militant blew up a car bomb beside the Humvee in which he was manning the gun turret.
Ahmed was an outstanding gunner. Earlier this year, he had saved my life when a suspected car bomb came screeching towards us in the badlands of Iraq's western province of Anbar.
Mosul is not Anbar. It is a massive city with narrow streets and a population of more than a million, with IS fighters and car bombs lying in wait.
In a matter of seconds, a car bomb can appear and devastate Iraqi forces.
It's the jihadists' version of an air strike and the main reason why Iraqi special forces casualties are mounting. Nothing was left of Ahmed's to bury - no body, no clothes.
Iraqis fleeing the Aden area of Mosul wave white flags as they approach Iraqi special forces in the Kukjali district of Mosul, Iraq (18 November 2016)Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Many Iraqis see CTS personnel as their country's most professional and least sectarian fighters
Ahmed was one of the many CTS personnel to have been at the centre of Iraq's wars since 2003.
Originally set up by the US military as the Iraqi Counter-Terrorism Force (ICTF), recruits were expected to meet similar standards expected of US special forces personnel.
After 10 days of basic training in Baghdad, candidates were sent to Jordan to undertake a three-month selection process.
Out of an initial pool of some 1,200 men, only 80 made it through.
Throughout selection, candidates were not allowed to call each other by their names, using only assigned numbers.
A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)Image copyrightAP
Image caption
Iraqi special forces are being targeted repeatedly with car bombs as they push into Mosul
In a country that would eventually be torn apart by sectarian tensions, the system had the unexpected advantage of creating an esprit de corps among Shia Arab, Sunni Arab and Kurdish recruits.
The intensive training and meritocratic command structure - a novelty - helped create perhaps the only success story of the US military's efforts to rebuild the Iraqi security forces.
As the Americans left in 2011, standards slipped and selection changed.
But the CTS remained the most professional and least sectarian fighting force in the country.
And when the Iraqi army collapsed after marauding Sunni supremacists tore through the country in 2014, they were the last soldiers standing - folk heroes to the point that even Shia militiamen began donning ICTF patches.

Media captionJournalist Ayman Oghanna travelled with Iraqi forces, who met with heavy resistance from IS fighters
In nearly every battle against IS, Iraq's special forces have been the tip of the spear.
Ahmed was there in Ramadi, in Hit, in Falluja and, finally, in Mosul - just as he was there in earlier battles against al-Qaeda in Iraq and the Shia militias.
Despite his war record, Ahmed was not, as one colleague likes to say, your typical "double-hard war bastard".
He was perhaps the silliest war hero you will ever get to meet, cracking corny jokes with that same "SpongeBob" smile, no matter how miserable the situation was.
Ahmed Image copyrightAYMAN OGHANNA
Image caption
Sharing a laugh at night during the Mosul offensive
"What's there to eat?" Ahmed would always ask me before licking his lips, grabbing my gut and shouting: "Ayman! Ayman is delicious."
Just on Thursday, I needed a cigarette lighter and went to Ahmed.
He pulled out a stack of 10 held together by a rubber band. "Now I don't have so many, so the price is high," he said. "I'll give you the blue one for 1,000 dollars."
"Sure, Ahmed," I told him. "I'll bring the money tomorrow."
"For tomorrow, the price is 2,000 dollars," he responded. I agreed.
It's a debt I'll never get to pay.
Related Topics
Islamic State group
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Islamic State

Battle for Mosul: The story so far
19 November 2016
Islamic State group: The full story
20 June 2016
Is so-called Islamic State finished?
5 October 2016
Islamic State and the crisis in Iraq and Syria in maps
2 November 2016
Why is Dabiq so important for IS?
4 October 2016
Syria rebels set up camp for IS defectors
12 October 2016
Why so-called Islamic State chooses to bomb during Ramadan
5 July 2016
Turkey v Syria's Kurds v Islamic State
23 August 2016
Who is Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi?
8 March 2016
Islamic State: What is the attraction for young Europeans?
8 March 2016
Iraq divisions undermine IS fight
5 February 2016
Counting the cost of air strikes on IS
4 February 2016
Inside the Islamic State kidnap machine
22 September 2015
Islamic State: Where key countries stand
3 December 2015
Profiles

What is the Khorasan Group?
24 September 2014
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: Islamic State's driving force
31 July 2014
Backgrounders

Islamic State: The struggle to stay rich
8 March 2016
The rise of jihadists in Iraq and Syria
3 October 2014
Isis: A thoroughly modern caliphate
11 July 2014
Who are the Kurds?
14 March 2016
Video

Video Who's in charge of IS? In 90 secs
4 March 2016
Video How so-called Islamic State started - In 3 minutes
9 March 2016
Middle East
Relatives mourn 15-year-old Ziad Rihani, who was killed by shellfire in the besieged rebel-held Douma district of Damascus, Syria (14 November 2016)
Almost 1m under siege in Syria - UN
21 November 2016
From the section Middle East
Full article Almost 1m under siege in Syria - UN
Map of Libya
'Monkey' sparks fierce battle in Libya
21 November 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article 'Monkey' sparks fierce battle in Libya
A man walks over the remains of a building destroyed by fighting in Taiz, Yemen (20 November 2016)
No extension to 48-hour truce in Yemen
21 November 2016
From the section Middle East
Full article No extension to 48-hour truce in Yemen
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Mosul battle: 'Don't be afraid, we're here to protect you'
Mosul battle: 'Don't be afraid, we're here to protect you'
 Shooting stars from space for 2020 Olympics
Shooting stars from space for 2020 Olympics
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 The street-to-street battles for Mosul
The street-to-street battles for Mosul
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Jeremy Clarkson 'flight ban' story comes under scrutiny
BBC News
Jeremy Clarkson 'flight ban' story comes under scrutiny
 Yellowstone Park accident victim dissolved in boiling acidic pool
BBC News
Yellowstone Park accident victim dissolved in boiling acidic pool
 North Korea makes first mention of US election result
BBC News
North Korea makes first mention of US election result
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
BBC Culture
The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
47 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
7 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
5 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
6
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
7
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
10
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
 
From Around the Web
 The 50 Most Unreliable Quarterbacks of All Time
The 50 Most Unreliable Quarterbacks of…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
The 39 Worst Films Ranked From Bad to Really Bad
The 39 Worst Films Ranked From Bad to Really Bad
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
2015's Top 10 Popular Baby Names in Each State
2015's Top 10 Popular Baby Names in Each…
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Ranked: The 100 Richest Members of Congress
Ranked: The 100 Richest Members of Congress
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Most Common First Names in Medical Schools
The Most Common First Names in Medical Schools
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Ray Lewis Gets the SNL Treatment
Ray Lewis Gets the SNL Treatment
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
