BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
selected
Australia
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
US & Canada
Nairobi striking doctors tear-gassed as patients 'walk out'
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Share
striking doctors
Image caption
The doctors' union said not even emergency care would be provided
Police have fired tear gas to disperse hundreds of doctors striking in the Kenyan capital Nairobi.
The medics, wearing white gowns and surgical caps, were demanding the government honour a 2013 deal to increase salaries.
Dozens of mental health patients were said to have walked out of a hospital in Nairobi during the strike.
Officials say the action is premature and negotiations should continue.
BBC Africa Live: More on this and other stories
Doctors take on traditional healers in Kenya
They say doctors have defied a court order suspending the strike until the end of this month to allow for more talks.
But the Kenya Medical Practitioners Pharmacists and Dentists' Union (KMPDU) said it had run out of patience after government commitments failed to materialise.
"We have had lots and lots of diplomacy, and lots and lots of dialogue. Dialogue has to come to an end," union chairman Samuel Oroko said.
About 5,000 medical staff in more than 2,000 public hospitals stopped working at midnight on Sunday.
doctor in kenyatta national hospitalImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Doctors also want more medical staff to be hired
Hospitals would not offer even emergency services during the action, the union said.
A BBC correspondent says this puts thousands of lives at risk because many Kenyans cannot afford private medical care.
At one hospital in western Kenya, a reporter with the Daily Nation newspaper heard a nurse tell a crying woman in labour to go and see the county governor. Under the Kenyan system, counties are responsible for paying some medical staff.
Meanwhile, at least 50 mental health patients at the Mathare mental hospital in Nairobi were reported to have left the facility amid the chaos of the strike.
Video posted on the website of the Standard newspaper appeared to show patients climbing over hospital walls and walking away.
striking doctors
Image caption
The doctors' hashtrag "LipaKamaTender" refers to alleged government corruption
What is the strike about?
Medical staff want a deal signed between the Kenya Medical Practitioners' Union and the Kenya government in 2013 to be implemented.
The agreement included a 300% pay rise for doctors.
The doctors' union also says it wants more medics hired to reduce the doctor-patient ratio, currently one doctor for more than 16,000 Kenyans.
"We have a big shortage of doctors yet our counties are sending doctors away, saying they cannot hire more doctors," union representative Gitau Kagona told the Daily Nation. "We cannot have good service delivery in hospitals because of this challenge."
Why are doctors talking about corruption?
Some medical staff brought empty sacks to an event marking the beginning of the strike, a reference to money paid under a controversial government tender to a businesswoman, who reportedly carried it off in a sack.
They also launched a social media hashtag - #LipaKamaTender - which roughly translates as "pay like the tenders", implying the state should pay their salaries as efficiently as it pays government tenders.
How common are such strikes in Kenya?
There have been protests and isolated strikes from various medical practitioners in parts of the country over the delay in raising salaries.
However this is the first nationwide strike on the issue.
The doctors' decision not to offer emergency care follows a similar approach taken by medical staff during a week-long strike in Burkina Faso last month, when medical students and army health workers were brought in to offer treatment.
Related Topics
Kenya
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Kenyan vasectomies broadcast live on Facebook
18 November 2016
Letter from Africa: Doctors take on traditional healers in Kenya
23 March 2016
Kenya country profile
19 February 2016
Africa
map
Tribal clashes in DR Congo leave 31 dead
6 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Tribal clashes in DR Congo leave 31 dead
Traffic in Nairobi
African nations ban Europe 'dirty fuel'
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article African nations ban Europe 'dirty fuel'
Ousainou Darboe had been due to stand in last Thursday's presidential election
Gambia opposition leader freed on bail
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Gambia opposition leader freed on bail
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Minister's vow to protect fishing industry
Minister's vow to protect fishing industry
 Raised in the UK but 'blocked' from going to university
Raised in the UK but 'blocked' from going to university
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
 Gambia election: President Yahya Jammeh 'will never pardon' opposition
Gambia election: President Yahya Jammeh 'will never pardon…
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
BBC News
Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
 Walter Scott murder case ends in mistrial for former officer
BBC News
Walter Scott murder case ends in mistrial for former officer
 How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
BBC News
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
BBC Autos
The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
 Is it rude to recline your seat?
BBC Autos
Is it rude to recline your seat?
Africa live reporting
LIVE Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
9 hours ago
Scroll down for Monday's stories
Full article Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 You Probably Won't Guess Who Was the Richest President of All Time
You Probably Won't Guess Who Was the Richest President…
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The World's Healthiest Dog Breeds
The World's Healthiest Dog Breeds
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Which Artist Shares Your Birth Year?
Which Artist Shares Your Birth Year?
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Could Your Gut Bacteria Make You Tired All the Time?
Could Your Gut Bacteria Make You Tired All the Time?
Men's Fitness
The Most Famous Musician From Each State
The Most Famous Musician From Each State
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
