BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
selected
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Asia
selected
China
India
New Zealand quake: The cut-off tourist town of Kaikoura
By Simeon Paterson
BBC News
25 November 2016
 From the section Asia
Share
A landslide over a road outside Kaikoura (14 Nov 2016)Image copyrightAP
The tourists are gone, the town is cut off and the sewage is backing up, but businesses in quake-hit Kaikoura are vowing to struggle on.
The town was cut off from the rest of New Zealand's South Island when a magnitude 7.8 earthquake destroyed its roads and railway on 14 November.
Nearly two weeks later there is still no easy way in or out of the town and its biggest industries - fishing, agriculture and tourism - have ground to an agonising halt, just as it was preparing for peak visitor season.
Earthquake damage to State Highway 1 is seen south of Kaikoura on 16 November 2016.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Restoring road access is the highest priority for many
"Quite literally, the money has just stopped coming in," said Matt Foy, the founder of Kaikoura Kayaks.
"We've had a couple of tours out with people who were stranded here who have nothing else to do, but at this time of year we should be absolutely heaving."
Like many in the town, he is relying on government assistance, considerate banks and donations.
A town which relies on tourism, farming and fishing is now struggling to find a way forward.
"I hear that people are milking their cows and the milk is going down the drain because there are no tankers coming in to pick that milk up," said Mr Foy.
Paua shellfish lay dead where they would have been covered by water before the earthquake.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Shellfish lie dead where they once would have been underwater
Ben Dalton, deputy director-general at New Zealand's Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) said that for the next three months "we have a ban on the taking of paua [abalone], seaweed and shellfish, and a one-month ban on the taking of crayfish".
The halt is to allow their populations to recover after the sea bed rose "up to 4m" (13ft) in places, stranding and killing huge numbers of the animals. Much of that sealife is now festering on the shoreline.
The town's harbour is also now obstructed and "the sewage system has packed up". If sewage tanks cannot be brought in, it may have to be discharged into the sea.
The geological impact of a 'complex' tremor
Stranded NZ cows rescued after quake
Hana O'Regan is a spokesperson for the Ngai Tahu, the prominent Maori tribe in the region which has a number of seafood, farming and tourism business in Kaikoura.
In the immediate aftermath of the quake, the tribe was hosting hundreds of people in the traditional meeting place, the marae, and was helicoptering in supplies to local people.
Damaged house near Kaikoura (14 Nov 2016)Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Many people are unlikely to ever be able to return to their homes
At one point, the people staying in the marae were dining on crayfish salvaged from a Ngai Tahu-owned facility in the town.
"It looked very nice on TV, but in reality that was the only food source in town," said Ms O'Regan.

Media captionCCTV shows the moment the quake hit shops in New Zealand
She said that with homes still being assessed to see if they're safe to live in, and without any easy way of getting to the town - and with strong aftershocks still hitting - community members "haven't even started talking about what's going to happen next".
While people are determined to regroup and think of new opportunities, "at the moment the priority is on the families, the community and keeping people safe".
"In terms of the impact on the economy, even the word significant doesn't quite cover it. It's an absolutely gamechanger in what will be able to be done there."
A handout picture made available by the New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) shows a Seahawk helicopter landing supplies in Kaikoura on 18 November 2016.Image copyrightEPA
Image caption
New Zealand's military has been airlifting supplies into Kaikoura
The only businesses which have not ground to a complete halt, says Mr Foy, are the bars and cafes.
"Everyone needs to eat and go and vent somewhere and have a beer and have a chat about things."
Despite delays in reconnecting the town - aftershocks have caused further landslips - there is a determination to carry on. "It's just a hurdle we have to get over," says Mr Foy.
But for intrepid visitors that come when the roads open, the huge geological changes have created "a new playground" to explore, he promises.
"We have a new phenomenon in Whalers Bay with the "Hope Springs" he says, using his name for an area of bubbles now coming up from the sea floor, apparently caused by gasses being released from the seabed.
Seal pup on rocks outside Kaikoura (21 Nov 2016)Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
A local seal colony has brought some hope after it returned to rocks outside the town to breed
He is hoping it might even become a draw for tourists once road access is restored. Currently the only way in is by military convoy on a damaged inland road and on a handful of often booked-out flights.
"It's getting road access that's the priority" he says, "and letting people know that it's safe to come here and they've got places to stay."
"It's too early to tell" when things might return to normal, the MPI's Ben Dalton says. "There's so much that's got to be done."
But the whales and dolphins that drew so many tourists before the quake have not gone anywhere, Mr Foy points out.
"Kaikoura is still one of the most magical spots in the world. It hasn't disappeared."
Additional reporting by Anna Jones
Related Topics
New Zealand
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Image gallery New Zealand quake: The geological impact of a 'complex' tremor
18 November 2016
New Zealand cows rescued after stranded by earthquake
15 November 2016
Video New Zealand earthquake: CCTV shows the moment it struck
14 November 2016
Asia
Supporters hold a photograph of Tamil Nadu state leader Jayalalithaa Jayaram
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
6 December 2016
 From the section India
Full article Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Australia flag flip flip
Alternative Australia Day event banned
5 December 2016
 From the section Australia
Full article Alternative Australia Day event banned
Pearl Harbour attack
Japan PM to make first Pearl Harbor visit
5 December 2016
 From the section Asia
Full article Japan PM to make first Pearl Harbor visit
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Brexit Supreme Court hearing: Highlights from day one
Brexit Supreme Court hearing: Highlights from day one
 Huge fireworks haul blown up in Peru
Huge fireworks haul blown up in Peru
 Melbourne driver refuels during chase with police
Melbourne driver refuels during chase with police
 Stand well back
Stand well back
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Daughter vows to find dad's killers 20 years after his death
Daughter vows to find dad's killers 20 years after his death
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 Devon couple slept as wildfire forced Gatlinburg evacuation
BBC News
Devon couple slept as wildfire forced Gatlinburg evacuation
 Court showdown: Should Holyrood play a role in Article 50?
BBC News
Court showdown: Should Holyrood play a role in Article 50?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
BBC Future
11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
 Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
BBC Future
Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
10 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 The Best Types of Dogs
The Best Types of Dogs
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Celebrities With Famous Parents
The Most Famous Celebrities With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous Countries
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
These Presidents Have the Highest IQs
These Presidents Have the Highest IQs
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Which Famous Actor is Your Age?
Which Famous Actor is Your Age?
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
설계자들로부터의 메시지
나는 누구이고, 나는 왜 살고 있는가 자살하기전 꼭 읽어야할 행복의 책
www.rael.org
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
