BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 RUGBY UNION
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
Live Scores
Results
Fixtures
Tables
All Teams
English
Scottish
Welsh
Irish
New Zealand duo Fekitoa and Cane to have citing hearings on Tuesday

From the section Rugby Union
Share this page
 Malakai Fekitoa tackles Simon Zebo during the second half at the Aviva Stadium
Malakai Fekitoa was sin-binned for his second-half tackle on Simon Zebo
New Zealand pair Malakai Fekitoa and Sam Cane will face disciplinary hearings on Tuesday after being cited following the 21-9 win over Ireland.

Both were cited for "allegedly dangerous tackles" in Saturday's win.

Cane, who will miss Saturday's game against France because of injury, has been reported for the high tackle which ended Robbie Henshaw's game early on.

Fekitoa, who scored two tries in Dublin, has been cited for a high tackle on Simon Zebo after half-time.

Guscott column: 'Referees need to look harder at New Zealand'
England's Launchbury cited for alleged kick against Fiji
Flanker Cane's shoulder appeared to connect with Henshaw's neck region and led to the Ireland centre being taken off after only 10 minutes with his neck in a brace.

Referee Jaco Peyper opted to only award a penalty, while Cane was forced to leave the field shortly afterwards with an ankle injury which will rule him out of the Stade de France contest.

Ireland captain Rory Best talks to referee Jaco Peyper
Ireland captain Rory Best queried a number of New Zealand tackles during the game
Fekitoa was sin-binned for his high challenge on Zebo early in the second half but returned to score New Zealand's clinching third try in the 65th minute.

Sunday's statement from the autumn internationals disciplinary authorities said both players had been cited for "allegedly tackling an opponent dangerously".

Prior to the autumn Tests, World Rugby warned "reckless contact" with a player's head could result in red cards, leading to the expectation that referees would be more stringent when it came to high tackles.

Alan Quinlan on Twitter
Sky Sports match summariser and ex-Ireland international Alan Quinlan responds to Sunday's development
With New Zealand players making several other dubious challenges in addition to those of Cane and Fekitoa, Ireland coach Joe Schmidt was asked about the All Blacks' physicality following the game, but opted to keep his own counsel on the issue.

"We don't control that," the New Zealand-born Ireland coach told RTE.

"We've just got to forge ahead with who we had left once once those guys had been knocked around. That's all we can do."
Share this page
Find out more

Irish Rugby

Read more on Irish Rugby
New Zealand

Read more on New Zealand
World Rugby

Read more on World Rugby
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Related to this story

'Refs should keep closer eye on All Blacks'

18h From the section Rugby Union
Read more on Jeremy Guscott on New Zealand's win over Ireland, plus England, Scotland & Wales
Schmidt quiet on All Blacks physicality

2d From the section Irish Rugby
Read more on Joe Schmidt: Ireland coach quiet on All Blacks physicality after Dublin defeat
Launchbury cited for alleged kick

1d From the section Rugby Union
Read more on England's Joe Launchbury cited for alleged kick during win over Fiji
Ireland 9-21 New Zealand

2d From the section Irish Rugby
Read more on All Blacks avenge Chicago loss to Ireland with 21-9 win in Dublin
 
From Around the Web
 Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Muscle & Fitness
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of addicted players!
Are you a strategic thinker? Test your skills with Millions of…
Soldiers
You Won't Believe Who the Most Famous British Actor Is
You Won't Believe Who the Most Famous British Actor Is
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Over 1 million people use this language learning app
Over 1 million people use this language learning app
Babbel
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
The Most Popular Song of Every Year Since 1940
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Say Goodbye to These Names, They're Going Extinct
Say Goodbye to These Names, They're Going Extinct
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
