BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
News From Elsewhere
Poles mock ruling party MP's deportation comments
By News from Elsewhere...
...as found by BBC Monitoring
21 November 2016
 Share
Beata Mateusiak-PieluchaImage copyrightSUPERSTACJA.TV
Image caption
Beata Mateusiak-Pielucha, seen here in July, has rejected the criticism
A Polish MP who suggested that non-Catholics should have to declare that they respect "Polish values" or face deportation has prompted a wave of mockery online.
Beata Mateusiak-Pielucha, of the ruling Law and Justice party, wrote an article on a new film about the Volyn massacre, but drifted onto the topic of religious minorities in Poland. "We should demand that atheists, Orthodox believers or Muslims clearly state that they know and undertake to fully respect the Polish constitution and values ​​recognised in Poland as important," she wrote on the wPolityce.pl website. "Failure to meet these requirements should serve as a solid reason for deportation."
Facebook users were quick to respond with irony: 44,000 have joined an event page called "List of Passengers for the First Deportation by Beata Mateusiak". It says it's compiling information on where people want to go, "to help the government solve the problem of logistics".
One user ponders where, as a Polish national, he would be sent: "If we are talking the tropics, I'm packed and ready to go by 10am." Journalist Jakub Zulczyk wrote a mock letter to the MP: "I am writing in relation to the deportation you are planning for atheists. May I please suggest that my family and I would most like to go to New Zealand or Argentina."
Others found the MP's words inexcusably offensive, with some suggesting she should be the first one sent away. And commentator Joanna Gierak-Onoszko noted: "The internet is laughing, but what if the demands put forward by Ms Mateusiak-Pielucha come into force?"
There may yet be repercussions in parliament, as an MP from the anti-establishment Kukiz'15 group says he plans to refer Ms Mateusiak-Pielucha's comments to the ethics committee.
But she has shrugged off the criticism, saying she wasn't suggesting any Polish citizens should face deportation, but was rather highlighting "the threat posed by the increasing number of migrants working and living in Poland".
Next story: Egypt girls launch cycling equality campaign
Use #NewsfromElsewhere to stay up-to-date with our reports via Twitter.
Related Topics
Poland
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 Perry Berry Senior wants to create a place for little people in the Philippines
Perry Berry Senior wants to create a place for little people in the Philippines
 Menie Estate resident: 'I saw Hillary getting in'
Menie Estate resident: 'I saw Hillary getting in'
 Think Again: Here's a solution to tackle mass shootings in America
Think Again: Here's a solution to tackle mass shootings in America
 Muslim woman: 'Why I backed Donald Trump for president'
Muslim woman: 'Why I backed Donald Trump for president'
 Dog rescues boy from tumble dryer
Dog rescues boy from tumble dryer
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 French boat sank in Devon harbour due to 'language difficulties'
BBC News
French boat sank in Devon harbour due to 'language difficulties'
 'So drunk my daughter, 12, made my meals'
BBC News
'So drunk my daughter, 12, made my meals'
 British woman 'arrested in Dubai after reporting rape'
BBC News
British woman 'arrested in Dubai after reporting rape'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Would you travel 700mph in a tube?
BBC Autos
Would you travel 700mph in a tube?
 Staring into the abyss
BBC Culture
Staring into the abyss
 Is this a photo or a painting?
BBC Culture
Is this a photo or a painting?
Latest Posts
Poles mock ruling party MP's deportation comments
MP suggests non-Catholics should declare they respect "Polish values" or face deportation.
21 November 2016
Egypt girls launch cycling equality campaign
21 November 2016
Ancient Egypt crocodile surprise at Dutch museum
18 November 2016
'Russiano' coffee joke sparks online humour
17 November 2016
More from BBC Monitoring

About BBC Monitoring
Reports and analysis from TV, radio, web and print media around the world
Country Profiles
An instant guide to the history, politics and economics of countries and territories
More from the Magazine
Answering life’s questions through daily features, quizzes and opinions.
 
From Around the Web
 Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
The 50 Best Movies Ever in 4 Charts
The 50 Best Movies Ever in 4 Charts
PrettyFamous
These 40 Cheeseburgers Have Fewer Calories Than a Cheesecake Factory Salad
These 40 Cheeseburgers Have Fewer…
HealthGrove
These Top 25 Shows are for Adults Only
These Top 25 Shows are for Adults Only
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Top Baby Names of the 1990s
Top Baby Names of the 1990s
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Finally You Can Track Your Car Using Your Smartphone!
Finally You Can Track Your Car Using Your…
SMART DEVICE TRENDS
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
