BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
US & Canada
selected
Oakland fire: Death toll rises to 36 and 'will increase'
4 hours ago
 From the section US & Canada
Share

Media captionOakland residents held a vigil for victims of the fire
Officials have said 36 people are now confirmed dead from a fire at a warehouse party in Oakland, California, and murder charges are possible.
Some 33 bodies have been identified, including victims from Finland, Korea and Guatemala.
Crews suspended body-recovery work for several hours due to fears that a damaged wall could collapse.
It is thought 50-100 people were in the venue, known as the Ghost Ship, when the fire broke out late on Friday.
Oakland fire victims and missing
Alameda County District Attorney Nancy O'Malley said on Monday that her office has has not yet determined whether a crime occurred.
But she said charges could range from murder to involuntary manslaughter.
US President Barack Obama paid tribute, saying: "Oakland is one of the most diverse and creative cities in our country, and as families and residents pull together in the wake of this awful tragedy, they will have the unwavering support of the American people."
Friends and relatives of those dead or missing have been paying respects at a memorial near the warehouseImage copyrightAP
Image caption
Friends and relatives of those dead or missing have been paying respects at a memorial near the warehouse
people pay respectsImage copyrightAP
Image caption
Authorities still have not determined the cause of the blaze
Officials believe they have located the section of the building where the fire was started, but its cause is not yet known.
About 70% of the building has been searched already, Oakland Police tweeted on Monday morning, but investigators had not been able to access the site since late Sunday night.
The city of Oakland has been disclosing the identities of those killed, though withheld the name of the youngest, a 17-year-old.
The Ghost Ship fire's victims
Cash Askew, 22
David Clines, 35
Nick Gomez-Hall, 25
Sara Hoda, 30
Travis Hough, 35
Donna Kellogg, 32
Brandon Chase Wittenauer, 32
Peter Wadsworth
Riley Fritz, 29
Most of the victims were located in the centre of the warehouse structure, police said.
"We have 36 families not only grieving for their lost ones, but also they want to have answers. And we as a city collectively are working to find those answers," said Oakland police's Johnna Watson.
Aerial image of the burnt out venue and a photo of the interior before the fire
Image caption
The venue know as the Ghost Ship housed artists' studios and held music events
The blaze caused the roof to collapse on to the second floor, part of which then fell through to the ground floor.
The opening of a criminal investigation allows authorities to preserve evidence and see if there was any criminal responsibility, whether through arson or negligence.
The building was used to house artists in improvised studios but several reports say people were illegally living there too.
Neighbours had complained to the city about rubbish piling up on the street outside, and about the illegal tenants.
Ajesh Shah via APImage copyrightAP
Image caption
This photo shows the building's interior in 2014
"That place was just a death trap,'' former resident Shelley Mack told the Associated Press. "I didn't think it was going to last this long before it went up or somebody shut it down.''
Families of loved ones were asked to gather things like toothbrushes and combs to aid with DNA identification.
Media in Oakland named Derick Ion Almena as the co-operator of the collective with his partner, Micah Allison.
A Facebook post by him lamenting the loss of his belongings but saying he was "blessed that my children and Micah were at a hotel safe and sound" drew a barrage of criticism online.
Related Topics
California
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
US & Canada
Father and son
Hot car death father sentenced to life
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Hot car death father sentenced to life
Al Gore on an elevator
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
Motorist Walter Scott (L) is seen in this composite photo with former South Carolina officer Michael Slager (R).
Mistrial in US police killing of driver
5 December 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Mistrial in US police killing of driver
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Helen Marten wins 2016 Turner Prize
Helen Marten wins 2016 Turner Prize
 Hidden message in Sandy Hook video goes viral
Hidden message in Sandy Hook video goes viral
 Gun-wielding student at Utah school disarmed by his mum
Gun-wielding student at Utah school disarmed by his mum
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Siberian man tracks down great-grandfather's executioners
Siberian man tracks down great-grandfather's executioners
 Niccolo Machiavelli 'has jumped cultures' says McTernan
Niccolo Machiavelli 'has jumped cultures' says McTernan
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
BBC News
Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
 Six family members killed in Austrian house near St Poelten
BBC News
Six family members killed in Austrian house near St Poelten
 Child sex claims against youth coach Hugh Stevenson
BBC News
Child sex claims against youth coach Hugh Stevenson
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
BBC Culture
Film review: In Allied Pitt and Cotillard go to Casablanca
 What history’s love letters reveal
BBC Culture
What history’s love letters reveal
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make the List?
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Ranking 2016's Least Valuable Players of 2016
Ranking 2016's Least Valuable Players of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous Countries
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
Ranking Every Clint Eastwood Movie from Worst to First
Ranking Every Clint Eastwood Movie from Worst to First
PrettyFamous
The Anatomy of Body Odor
The Anatomy of Body Odor
Muscle & Fitness
High School Ball Player Shows What Sportsmanship Is All About
High School Ball Player Shows What Sportsmanship Is…
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
고음질 전용 블루투스리시버
SLASH-R, 고성능 DAC 사용. 하이파이에 스마트폰 무선 연결
interpark.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
