BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
selected
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Politics
selected
Parliaments
Brexit
US Election 2016
'Pay to stay' social housing plan dropped
7 hours ago
 From the section UK Politics
Share
HousingImage copyrightPA
Plans to force higher-earning social housing tenants to pay more in rent have been scrapped by the government.
Ministers said they had "listened carefully" and decided not to proceed with the controversial "pay to stay" policy.
It would have applied to social housing residents in England earning £31,000 or £40,000 in London.
Councils and housing associations would be able to decide whether to impose higher rents, the government said.
Housing minister Gavin Barwell also confirmed the government would be ending the right of social housing tenants to stay in their homes for life, by introducing compulsory fixed-term tenancies.
This will mean tenancies are periodically reviewed "to ensure tenants still need a socially rented home", he said, with councils told to prioritise lower-income households.
He added that the government was exploring other ways to ensure higher-earning tenants "make a greater contribution to costs".
'Subsidising lifestyles'
The change in policy comes after a public consultation into "pay to stay" in which council leaders and charities criticised the plans.
Under the current rules, social landlords can charge tenants with an income of over £60,000 market or near-market rent.
Former Chancellor George Osborne announced a compulsory scheme in his July 2015 Budget, with the government saying it was unfair for hardworking people to be "subsidising the lifestyles of those on higher than average incomes".
It would have meant local authorities were forced to raise rents with a taper system in place for those earning over £31,000 or £40,000 in London.
More than 70,000 households were set to be affected by the changes, pushing tenants' annual rent up by more than £1,000 a year on average.
In a written statement, Mr Barwell said the government remained committed to "ensuring social housing is occupied by those who need it most".
He added: "But we need to do so in a way that supports those ordinary working class families who can struggle to get by, and in a way which delivers real savings to the taxpayer.
"The policy as previously envisaged did not meet those aims."
'Unworkable'
The Local Government Association was among the organisations warning families could be forced from their homes and unable to stay in the same area if subsidised rents were dropped, with the proposal also facing resistance in the House of Lords.
The LGA said the decision not to enforce a compulsory policy would be a "huge relief to households across the country", saying implementing it would have been "difficult, lengthy and costly".
Liberal Democrat housing spokesman Lord Shipley said: "Finally the government have realised their plans to charge people more for their homes were not only unfair, but unworkable."
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
UK Politics
Theresa May
May 'trying to avoid Brexit cliff edge'
21 November 2016
From the section Business 2485 comments
Full article May 'trying to avoid Brexit cliff edge'
Jeremy Corbyn
Corbyn offers 'deal' to businesses
21 November 2016
From the section UK Politics
Full article Corbyn offers 'deal' to businesses
Diane James
Former leader Diane James quits UKIP
21 November 2016
From the section UK Politics
Full article Former leader Diane James quits UKIP
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Storm Angus: Cargo ship collides with barge
Storm Angus: Cargo ship collides with barge
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 'They didn't believe I had been tortured'
'They didn't believe I had been tortured'
 Menie Estate resident: 'I saw Hillary getting in'
Menie Estate resident: 'I saw Hillary getting in'
 Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
 EU Yorkshire and Humber seat legal action by Alex Story
EU Yorkshire and Humber seat legal action by Alex Story
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Coins buried during English Civil War found on farm
BBC News
Coins buried during English Civil War found on farm
 Body to be exhumed as part of investigation into secret Army unit
BBC News
Body to be exhumed as part of investigation into secret Army unit
 German poster of Baroque old master 'too disturbing'
BBC News
German poster of Baroque old master 'too disturbing'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The 22 syllables that can get you killed
BBC Culture
The 22 syllables that can get you killed
 Can a smartphone designer reinvent the lorry?
BBC Autos
Can a smartphone designer reinvent the lorry?
 Would you travel 700mph in a tube?
BBC Autos
Would you travel 700mph in a tube?
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
9 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
10
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
 
From Around the Web
 25 Trending French Baby Names
25 Trending French Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The Most Popular Baby Names Inspired by Summer
The Most Popular Baby Names Inspired by Summer
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to remove Park
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to…
Nikkei Asian Review
These Are Flat Out the Worst Films of All Time
These Are Flat Out the Worst Films of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Most Classic TV Shows
The Most Classic TV Shows
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
Instant Grammar Checker
Grammarly Makes Sure Everything You Type Is Effective And Mistake-Free. Try Now!
grammarly.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
