BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
selected
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Business
selected
Market Data
Markets
Economy
Companies
Entrepreneurship
Technology of Business
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Philip Morris could stop making conventional cigarettes
By Dominic O'Connell
Today business presenter
30 November 2016
 From the section Business
Share

Media captionAndre Calantzopoulos tells Radio 4's Today he wants to move away from conventional cigarettes
Philip Morris has launched a new, less harmful cigarette in the UK which it says could mean halting sales of its conventional tobacco products.
The so called Iqos product heats tobacco rather than burning it.
The tobacco giant claims this means smokers get the same nicotine hit, but 90% less of the nasty toxins that come with cigarette smoke.
It says trials - not yet externally verified - found the new cigarette had the same impact as quitting smoking.
The firm is not pushing that finding, saying only that the new product is likely to cause less harm.
Philip Morris International (PMI), the Swiss-headquartered giant created when America's Altria spun off its non-US interests eight years ago, has spent $3bn (£2.4bn) on creating the substitute cigarette.
cube research facilityImage copyrightTHOMAS JANTSCHER
Image caption
Philip Morris spent $2bn creating the substitute cigarette
Andre Calantzopoulos, PMI's chief executive, says he would like to work with governments towards the "phase-out" of conventional cigarettes.
In his first UK broadcast interview, he has told the Today programme that the company knows its products harm their consumers, and that the only correct response is to "to find and commercialise" ones that are less harmful.
"That is clearly our objective," he said.

Media captionDeborah Arnott from ASH tells Radio 4's Today the iQOS cigarettes are "not harm-free"
It is not the first time cigarette makers have experimented with heating rather than burning tobacco to do less less damage to consumers.
In the 1980s, Reynolds, the big American tobacco company, produced the Premier, which heated tobacco but which still involved some combustion.
It lasted a year, with customers complaining of a complicated lighting procedure and a charcoal aftertaste.
PMI's solution is much more Silicon Valley. The Iqos is a £45 battery pack that looks like a small, dumpy mobile phone.
iQosImage copyrightPHILIP MORRIS
Image caption
The IQOS creates much less smoke than a conventional cigarette
It charges a slim cigarette holder. You buy packets of tobacco sticks - a packet of 20 will cost £8 - that look like someone has taken a pair of scissors to normal cigarettes and chopped them in half.
The stick goes in the holder, and you puff away.
There is much less smoke than a conventional cigarette, and, users say, the smell does not stick to your clothes. Other cigarette companies are not far off producing rival versions.
Opposition
E-cigarettes, which use an electronic system to deliver nicotine via a water vapour, are a different alternative.
Mr Calantzopoulos, however, points out their basic weakness. They are not very effective in converting traditional smokers.
The conversion rate to e-cigs of smokers is just 20%. Trials in Japan have shown that 70% of smokers stay with the new substitute once they have tried it.
Shareholders, Mr Calantzopoulos says, are enthusiastic about the new product.
He will need their backing, as traditional tobacco has proved an enormous money spinner.
Since PMI was created, it has returned nearly $83bn to investors in dividends and share buybacks - not far off its entire stock market valuation.
There is much riding on his new, low-harm cigarette.
But anti-smoking campaigners said products such as Iqos, like tobacco, need tough regulation. Deborah Arnott, chief executive of Action on Smoking and Health (Ash), told Today: "We still need to be very cautious about what the industry's up to."
"Philip Morris is a tobacco company. They are still making most of their profits from selling cigarettes," she said: "On current trends, smoking will kill one billion people in the 21st century, most in poor countries.
"If Philip Morris really want to see the end of smoking they have to stop promoting smoking to new young smokers around the world."
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Tobacco giants lose plain-packaging appeal
30 November 2016
Tobacco firm Reynolds 'stubs out $47bn BAT offer'
15 November 2016
British American Tobacco plans $47bn Reynolds merger
21 October 2016
Tobacco laws: Bid to overturn packaging rules dismissed
19 May 2016
Related Internet links

PMI.com
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Business
Mark Carney
Carney warns about disillusioned poor
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Carney warns about disillusioned poor
A copy of the local Chinese magazine Global People with a cover story that translates to 
Trump in Twitter outburst against China
5 December 2016
 From the section China 438 comments
Full article Trump in Twitter outburst against China
NYSE traders
Dow rises to a fresh record close
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Dow rises to a fresh record close
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Chernobyl shield completion like 'closing a nuclear wound'
Chernobyl shield completion like 'closing a nuclear wound'
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
 J Jayalalitha: From actress to politician
J Jayalalitha: From actress to politician
 Sexism solution: Teaching schoolgirls self defence
Sexism solution: Teaching schoolgirls self defence
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Giant turbine blade transported through Northamptonshire
Giant turbine blade transported through Northamptonshire
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 US economic growth revised up for third quarter
BBC News
US economic growth revised up for third quarter
 What would David Petraeus bring as secretary?
BBC News
What would David Petraeus bring as secretary?
 Mars probe returns first pictures
BBC News
Mars probe returns first pictures
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 The power of a beam of light
BBC Culture
The power of a beam of light
 Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
BBC Future
Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Clint Eastwood Movies Ranked from Worst to First
Clint Eastwood Movies Ranked from Worst to First
PrettyFamous
Brad Pitt Movies: Ranked From Worst to First
Brad Pitt Movies: Ranked From Worst to First
PrettyFamous
How Sugar Blunts the Effects of Alcohol
How Sugar Blunts the Effects of Alcohol
Men's Fitness
RANKED: The 27 Smartest Presidents
RANKED: The 27 Smartest Presidents
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The 75 Car Accident Capitals of America
The 75 Car Accident Capitals of America
@GraphiqHQ
Coming Soon: Tech That Can Detect When You're Hammered
Coming Soon: Tech That Can Detect When You're…
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
