
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
selected
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Asia
selected
China
selected
India
In pictures: Steel ladder makes 800m climb easier
21 November 2016
 From the section China
A group of children in Sichuan, China, have a new ladder to assist their 800-metre climb down to school.
An aerial view of Atuler village on a cliff on November 11, 2016 in Zhaojue county, ChinaBARCROFT IMAGES
Nicknamed "cliff village", Atuler is located on an 800 metre-high plateau in Sichuan, China. It is home to the Yi people, an ethnic minority group that can also be found in Vietnam and Thailand.
Children of Atuler Village climb the vine ladder on a cliff on their way home in Zhaojue county in southwest China's Sichuan province on May 14, 2016 in Zhaojue, ChinaBARCROFT IMAGES
Until now, 17 wooden ladders were the secluded village's only way to reach the outside world. But climbing on these ladders is perilous and at least seven people are known to have died while climbing, locals say.
A girl of Atuler Village looks back during climbing a cliff on her way home in Zhaojue county in southwest China's Sichuan province on May 14, 2016 in Zhaojue, China.BARCROFT IMAGES
About 20 children from Atuler village attend a boarding school down the cliff, meaning that they had to scale the dangerous wooden ladders before and after holidays.
The bridal procession climb on the newly-built metal ladder with hand railings to Atuler village as the old vine ladder is seen beside it on a cliff on November 11, 2016 in Zhaojue county, China.BARCROFT IMAGES
A steel ladder was put in place in early November. Even though it is still a tortuous trek, villagers say the new ladder has made a real difference and the climb takes an hour less time than it used to.
People climb on the newly-built metal ladder with hand railings to Atuler village on a cliff on November 11, 2016 in Zhaojue county, ChinaBARCROFT IMAGES
The Yi people of Atuler have been scaling the cliff for generations and they have set up rigid rules. While climbing, men bear the responsibility of taking care of children. Children under the age of 16 are not allowed to climb the cliff alone.
People climb on the newly-built metal ladder with hand railings to Atuler village on a cliff on November 11, 2016 in Zhaojue county, China.BARCROFT IMAGES
The steel ladder was built after the village attracted a lot of media interest in May. While many applaud the construction of the sturdier ladder, some netizens also wonder why villagers are not willing to move elsewhere. But residents told the Chinese press that they don't want to leave their homes, especially to cities where it will be difficult for them to make a living.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Video The world’s scariest school run?
27 May 2016
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
