V
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
PM signals £2bn a year science funding increase
By Pallab Ghosh
Science correspondent, BBC News
21 November 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Theresa MayImage copyrightPA
Image caption
After her CBI speech, Mrs May went on a tour of the Wellcome Genome Campus in Cambridge
Prime Minister Theresa May has unveiled plans to invest an extra £2bn a year in science by 2020.
The promised money will be for emerging fields of research in which the UK excels, such as robotics, artificial intelligence and biotech.
The investment is part of an industrial strategy the government is developing that aims to create and back economic "winners".
Mrs May made the commitment at a speech to the CBI.
Our competitors aren't standing still. They are investing heavily in research and development
Theresa May, Prime Minister
She told business leaders that she wanted the UK to be "the global go-to place for scientists, innovators and tech investors".
She cautioned though that although she wanted Britain to continue to attract the brightest and the best scientific talent, it could only continue to do so by bringing immigration down to "sustainable levels".
"Today, Britain has firms and researchers leading in some of the most exciting fields of human discovery. We need to back them and turn research strengths into commercial success," she said.
"That means not only investing more in research and development, but ensuring we invest that money wisely, supporting technologies and sectors that have the potential to deliver long-term benefits for Britain."
The president of the Royal Society, Prof Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, described the announcement as "very welcome".
"This sends out a strong signal to the rest of the world that Britain is determined to be a leading innovative country".
An influx of money on its own won't be sufficient in itself. We need to hire the best talent. Hopefully, a lot of that will be home-grown. But there is no substitute for attracting the best in the world so we can be the best in the world
Prof Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, President, Royal Society
But he said he was concerned that the tighter immigration rules that could be imposed after Brexit would hamper UK research: "An influx of money on its own won't be sufficient in itself if we are to make the best use of this money," he told BBC News.
"We need to hire the best talent. Hopefully a lot of that will be home-grown. But there is no substitute for attracting the best in the world so we can be the best in the world."
There has been a freeze in science spending since 2010. This was seen as a good settlement by the scientific community when the spending of other parts of government was heavily cut in response to the economic crises created by the financial crash of 2008.
But the freeze has meant a gradual erosion in the science budget because of inflation. And this has happened at a time when many other countries have greatly increased their investment in research.
"Our competitors aren't standing still. They are investing heavily in research and development," said Mrs May.
"So in the Autumn Statement on Wednesday, we will commit to substantial real-terms increases in government investment in R&D - investing an extra £2bn a year by the end of this Parliament to help put post-Brexit Britain at the cutting edge of science and tech."
Mrs May also announced a new Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund to direct some of the additional money to address what she described as Britain's "historic weakness" in turning its great world-leading science into commercial success.
The Prime Minister also indicated that there would be tax breaks to encourage firms to invest in research.
"Since 2010, we have made the research and development credit more generous and easier to use - and support has risen from £1bn to almost £2.5bn a year.
"Now we want to go further, and look at how we can make our support even more effective - because my aim is not simply for the UK to have the lowest corporate tax rate in the G20, but also a tax system that is profoundly pro-innovation."
Dr Sarah Main, director of the Campaign for Science and Engineering, said she was "impressed" by the announcement.
"The science community has been waiting to see what the leadership of the government has to say about science and engineering and our future. And this could not be better, coming directly from the Prime Minister. We are seeing a very clear signal of intent that she sees science and engineering being a very big part of our future."
Follow Pallab on Twitter
Related Topics
Theresa May
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Is this the PM's 'white heat' of technology moment?
21 November 2016
UK scientists speak about Brexit pain
19 July 2016
PM wants positive outcome for science in Brexit talks
28 July 2016
Related Internet links

Campaign for Science and Engineering
Royal Society
CBI
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Science & Environment
A plastic bags lies next to a jellyfish on the beach
'Fewer bags on beaches' after 5p fee
22 November 2016
 From the section UK
Full article 'Fewer bags on beaches' after 5p fee
Ginkgo
'Living fossil' genome decoded
21 November 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article 'Living fossil' genome decoded
Car park
Council ponders workplace parking levy
22 November 2016
From the section UK Politics
Full article Council ponders workplace parking levy
 
More Videos from the BBC
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Shooting stars from space for 2020 Olympics
Shooting stars from space for 2020 Olympics
 Andy Murray tells of family sacrifice to hone world number ones
Andy Murray tells of family sacrifice to hone world number ones
 'Huge potential' for suppliers across north Wales
'Huge potential' for suppliers across north Wales
 Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
 Daredevils race in wingsuit slalom at 160mph
Daredevils race in wingsuit slalom at 160mph
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
BBC News
Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
 In pictures: Snow falls across England - with more forecast
BBC News
In pictures: Snow falls across England - with more forecast
 Is this the PM's 'white heat' of technology moment?
BBC News
Is this the PM's 'white heat' of technology moment?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The 22 syllables that can get you killed
BBC Culture
The 22 syllables that can get you killed
 The electric motorbike inspired by a child's drawing
BBC Autos
The electric motorbike inspired by a child's drawing
 Is this a photo or a painting?
BBC Culture
Is this a photo or a painting?
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
9 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
10
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
 
From Around the Web
 The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the List?
The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to remove Park
South Korean opposition faces uphill battle to…
Nikkei Asian Review
Irish Baby Names That Are Popular in the U.S.
Irish Baby Names That Are Popular in the U.S.
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The Best Classic TV Shows before the 80s
The Best Classic TV Shows before the 80s
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Most Common First Names in Medical Schools
The Most Common First Names in Medical Schools
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Cinephiles: These Are the 39 Worst Films of All Time
Cinephiles: These Are the 39 Worst Films of All Time
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
Instant Grammar Checker
Grammarly Makes Sure Everything You Type Is Effective And Mistake-Free. Try Now!
grammarly.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
