BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Education & Family
Poorer pupils lag by almost two years
By Sean Coughlan
Education correspondent
28 minutes ago
 From the section Education & Family
Share
blackpoolImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Blackpool is one of six areas targeted for extra help with social mobility
Poorer pupils in disadvantaged "opportunity areas", designated for extra help by the government, are lagging almost two years behind better off counterparts elsewhere in England.
A study for the Ambition School Leadership charity found deprived youngsters in these six areas were 20.1 months behind at GCSE level.
Schools minister Nick Gibb said it showed the importance of targeting support at areas that were "the most challenged when it comes to social mobility".
There have been six opportunity areas named by the government so far - Norwich, Blackpool, Derby, Oldham, Scarborough and West Somerset - with the promise of more to follow.
There will be £60m of extra spending to promote social mobility in these areas, such as linking schools to businesses, universities and careers advisers.
Falling behind
The study shows how far "persistently disadvantaged" pupils - who have been eligible for free school meals for four out of five years - have fallen behind in secondary school.
They were found to be the equivalent of 20.1 months behind the average for children who were not on free school meals in other parts of England.
classroom
Image caption
The study found that poorer areas had slipped further behind better off regions
Pupils in the "opportunity areas" who were not on free school meals were also behind their counterparts in other parts of England - by 4.7 months.
The study looked at pupil achievement between 2010 and 2015 and found that the gap had widened.
Ambition School Leadership has been created from bringing together two education charities, Future Leaders Trust and Teaching Leaders, which had worked to improve school leadership, particularly in disadvantaged areas.
James Toop, chief executive of the new charity, said: "We know great leaders at all levels make great schools. We're going to be working even harder to reach these schools and give the children they serve a great education."
School Standards Minister Nick Gibb said the study showed the need for the government's plans to "make more good school places available, to more parents, in more parts of the country".
He said this would include "scrapping the ban on new grammar school places and harnessing the resources and expertise of universities, independent and faith schools".
"This report underlines the need to focus our efforts in the areas identified as the most challenged when it comes to social mobility."
A separate study from the the Education Policy Institute looked at Ofsted inspections in schools with a more disadvantaged intake.
The researchers claimed inspectors were more likely to have harsh judgments on schools with higher proportions of pupils on free school meals - and that they could be too generous to those with a wealthier intake.
An Ofsted spokeswoman rejected this claim, saying that inspectors would "mark down coasting schools in leafy suburbs where we see pupils not making as much progress as they should".
"Similarly, we do recognise schools in more deprived areas where children are making good progress."
Related Topics
Schools
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Greening announces social mobility 'opportunity areas'
4 October 2016
Education & Family
meeting
Schools helped to find governors online
21 November 2016
From the section Education & Family
Full article Schools helped to find governors online
People climb on the newly-built metal ladder with hand railings to Ahtuler village on a cliff on November 11, 2016 in Zhaojue county, China
Image gallery
Image gallery
New ladder eases schoolchildren's climb
21 November 2016
 From the section China
Full article New ladder eases schoolchildren's climb
The survey found that 92% of teachers say children who start primary one with delayed speech and language skills can fall behind other children.
Teachers concerned by children's speech
21 November 2016
From the section Northern Ireland
Full article Teachers concerned by children's speech
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Whalley Viaduct: £1.6m facelift for 170-year-old structure
Whalley Viaduct: £1.6m facelift for 170-year-old structure
 Parkinson: You wanted somehow to cuddle Ali
Parkinson: You wanted somehow to cuddle Ali
 How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
 'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
'Spice drug paralysing prison system'
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Why one Pennsylvania county voted Trump
Why one Pennsylvania county voted Trump
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Ivanka uses Trump 60 Minute interview to promote $10,000 bracelet
BBC News
Ivanka uses Trump 60 Minute interview to promote $10,000 bracelet
 US police officers shot in four attacks in one day
BBC News
US police officers shot in four attacks in one day
 America's heroin trail: A new generation of addicts
BBC News
America's heroin trail: A new generation of addicts
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
BBC Culture
The uplifting power of Leonard Cohen
 Staring into the abyss
BBC Culture
Staring into the abyss
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
9 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
10
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
 
From Around the Web
 50 Baby Names That Have Been Popular as Long as You Can Remember
50 Baby Names That Have Been Popular as Long…
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
These Countries Are the Poorest on Earth
These Countries Are the Poorest on Earth
country-facts.findthedata.com
These 40 Cheeseburgers Have Fewer Calories Than a Cheesecake Factory Salad
These 40 Cheeseburgers Have Fewer…
HealthGrove
The 50 Most Unreliable Quarterbacks of All Time
The 50 Most Unreliable Quarterbacks of…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Test out your Narcos knowledge with our special Narcos-themed Spanish lessons!
Test out your Narcos knowledge with our special…
Babbel
Best Baby Names for Animal Lovers
Best Baby Names for Animal Lovers
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
