BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk linked to skin tears'
1 hour ago
 From the section Health
Share
Young men and women on the beachImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Women and men who regularly trim or remove all their pubic hair run a greater risk of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) than those who do not, research suggests.
Doctors say small tears in the skin from shaving or trimming could make it easier for infections to take hold.
But they also say groomers - particularly extreme ones - tend to be more sexually active too.
STIs are passed on through unprotected sex or genital contact.
The findings come from a survey of more than 7,500 American adults, published in Sexually Transmitted Infections - a specialist BMJ journal.
The report, led by doctors from the University of California, San Francisco, said the two most likely explanations for the link between grooming and STIs were micro-tears in the skin, which increased the risk of viral STIs, and groomers being more likely to engage in risky sexual behaviour with more sexual partners.
Extreme cut
An electric razor was the most common tool used for pubic grooming among men, while a manual razor was more common among women.
About one in five men and women used scissors.
The researchers said it was unlikely that sharing grooming tools was an issue, because traces of the most common STIs had not been found on objects before.
But they did say doctors should advise groomers to cut back a little on their grooming or put off having sex until the skin had healed completely.
Almost three-quarters of respondents said they had groomed their pubic hair before, with 84% of women and 66% of men saying they had trimmed, shaved or waxed in the past.
Among the groomers, 17% described themselves as "extreme" - removing all hair at least once a month - and 22% as "high frequency" - trimming daily or weekly.
Lice protection
In the survey, any type of grooming was linked to an increased risk of having a sexually transmitted infection. And the more frequent and extreme the grooming, the greater the risk.
Those with the most extreme habits were three to four times more likely to contract an STI, particularly infections from skin to skin contact such as herpes and HPV (human papillomavirus).
But there was good news for groomers too - because their habit was found to protect against pubic lice.
The report said: "If grooming is found to protect against lice, individuals at risk for pubic lice could be counselled to remove their pubic hair."
What are STIs?
Examples are gonnorhea, herpes, syphilis and genital warts
The most common STI is chlamydia, which is easily passed on during sex
Young heterosexuals under 25 and men who have sex with men are most affected by STIs
Most sexually transmitted infections can be treated, and it is best if treatment starts as soon as possible
How to reduce the risk?
Use condoms regularly and correctly
Get tested at a sexual health clinic, a genitourinary medicine (GUM) clinic or at your GP surgery
Tell your partner if you have an STI, to avoid spread of infection
For more advice, see the sexual health charity FPA's website
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

STIs soaring in gay men - warning
23 June 2015
Bikini line waxing and shaving poses infection risk
19 March 2013
Rio 2016: 13 lesser-spotted oddities of the Olympics
18 August 2016
Around the BBC

STI increases mean 'more caution is needed' over oral sex - BBC Newsbeat
Related Internet links

Sexually Transmitted Infections - BMJ Journals
FPA - the sexual health charity
Sexually transmitted infections - FPA
NHS Choices - Sexually transmitted infections
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
HIV
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
striking doctors
Striking doctors tear-gassed in Nairobi
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Striking doctors tear-gassed in Nairobi
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Obama, Hollande, Renzi: G7 leaders are disappearing
Obama, Hollande, Renzi: G7 leaders are disappearing
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
 Wanted...two prime ministers
Wanted...two prime ministers
 Jigsaw boss: Black Friday is a 'complete and utter deception'
Jigsaw boss: Black Friday is a 'complete and utter deception'
 Trump's turnabout from 'lock her up' to no prosecution
Trump's turnabout from 'lock her up' to no prosecution
 National Library of Wales 'already addressing issues'
National Library of Wales 'already addressing issues'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Cambridge Rainbow vegetarian cafe refuses new £5 note
BBC News
Cambridge Rainbow vegetarian cafe refuses new £5 note
 Italy referendum: PM Renzi's future in the balance
BBC News
Italy referendum: PM Renzi's future in the balance
 Airline pilot suffers heart attack at Glasgow Airport
BBC News
Airline pilot suffers heart attack at Glasgow Airport
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Is it rude to recline your seat?
BBC Autos
Is it rude to recline your seat?
 Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
BBC Autos
Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
 The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
BBC Autos
The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up Aviation
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up…
Dassault Systemes
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous Countries
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to learn a language!
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to…
Babbel
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Ranking Meryl Streep Movies from Worst to Best
Ranking Meryl Streep Movies from Worst to Best
PrettyFamous
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
