
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
selected
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Technology
Satellite to help planes avoid turbulence
8 hours ago
 From the section Technology
Share
GOES-R satellite launchesImage copyrightUNITED LAUNCH ALLIANCE
A new weather satellite that could help pilots avoid turbulence has launched into space.
The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) said it would beam clearer images of cloud "waves", which contribute to turbulence, back to earth more quickly.
It is also set to give better estimates of wind speed, fog, ice and lightning.
Pilots have welcomed the advances, which are expected to be available from the second half of 2017.
GOES-R (Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite) is billed as the world's most advanced weather satellite.
It also claims to pick up on hurricanes, tornadoes, flooding, volcanic ash clouds, wildfires, lightning storms and solar flares more quickly.
The $1bn (£800m) satellite will scan the skies five times faster than previous versions and with four times greater image resolution, according to Noaa.
'Cloud waves'
For airlines, the improved data and imaging will help pilots plan their routes to avoid hazardous conditions.
Steven Goodman, a senior programme scientist for GOES-R, said satellites had previously struggled to capture clouds in enough detail to show the "waves" that contribute to turbulence.
But the new satellite would deliver clearer views and send images back within minutes, he told the BBC.
"It will give the weather as it's looking now rather than the weather that happened 15 to 30 minutes ago," he said.
It was designed to also measure in-cloud lightning, wind speeds and fog patterns more accurately, he said.
Plane flying through cloudsImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
Pilots will appreciate the promised advances in weather forecasting, according to Steve Landells, a flight safety specialist at the British Airline Pilots Association (Balpa).
Mr Landells, a pilot of 27 years, said turbulence caused by lightning storms was more predictable, but that other types were more difficult.
"If they can start predicting that to a great degree, and more timely, then that would be a significant help," he said.
Noaa teamed up with Nasa for the mission, which saw about 8,000 space programme workers gather at the launch site in Florida on Saturday.
The satellite is scheduled to reach an orbit of 22,300 miles (35,900km) in about two weeks and become operational within a year.
Once running, it aims to produce full images of the Western Hemisphere every 15 minutes and the continental US every five minutes. Specific storm regions will be updated every 30 seconds.
Related Topics
Aerospace
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

SpaceX aims to launch internet from space
17 November 2016
Technology
internet connecting cable
Government pledges faster broadband funds
22 November 2016
From the section Technology
Full article Government pledges faster broadband funds
An Uber driverless car launched in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in September
Insurers: 'Give us driverless car data'
Rory Cellan-Jones
Technology correspondent
22 November 2016
From the section Technology
Full article Insurers: 'Give us driverless car data'
IPhone 6 and 7
Apple to swap 'faulty' iPhone 6S batteries
21 November 2016
From the section Technology
Full article Apple to swap 'faulty' iPhone 6S batteries
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Doctor Who missing episode restored after 50 years
Doctor Who missing episode restored after 50 years
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 Shooting stars from space for 2020 Olympics
Shooting stars from space for 2020 Olympics
 The village that avoided India's cash crunch
The village that avoided India's cash crunch
 Selena Gomez says she was 'broken' by depression
Selena Gomez says she was 'broken' by depression
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
BBC News
Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
 'Slapping' death woman 'desperate for cure'
BBC News
'Slapping' death woman 'desperate for cure'
 'So drunk my daughter, 12, made my meals'
BBC News
'So drunk my daughter, 12, made my meals'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The real risks of artificial intelligence
BBC Future
The real risks of artificial intelligence
 Is this a photo or a painting?
BBC Culture
Is this a photo or a painting?
 The electric motorbike inspired by a child's drawing
BBC Autos
The electric motorbike inspired by a child's drawing
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
9 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
10
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
 
From Around the Web
 The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the List?
The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
How he learned 9 languages fluently
How he learned 9 languages fluently
Babbel
Which Famous Actor Was Born the Same Year as You?
Which Famous Actor Was Born the Same Year as You?
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
50 Baby Names Perfect for Summer
50 Baby Names Perfect for Summer
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The 50 Best Movies By the Numbers
The 50 Best Movies By the Numbers
PrettyFamous
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Kid Anymore
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Kid Anymore
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
