
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Scottish fossils tell story of first life on land
By Helen Briggs
BBC News
5 December 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Artist's impression of life at the timeImage copyrightMARK WITTON/NATIONAL MUSEUMS SCOTLAND
Image caption
Artist's impression of how the animals might have looked
Fossils of what may be the earliest four-legged backboned animals to walk on land have been discovered in Scotland.
The lizard-like creatures lived about 355 million years ago, when the ancestors of modern reptiles, birds and mammals emerged from swamps.
The discovery plugs a 15 million-year gap in the fossil record.
There are five complete fossils and many more fragments of bones that have yet to be classified.
Some resemble lizards or newts, while others are larger, with almost crocodile-like proportions.
"We're lifting the lid on a key part of the evolutionary story of life on land," said Prof Jennifer Clack of the University of Cambridge.
"What happened then affects everything that happens subsequently - so it affects the fact that we are here and which other animals live with us today."
Critical step
The fossils suggest that the first backboned animals to crawl around on land may have lived in what is now the Scottish borders.
Alternatively, there may be many more similar fossils in other parts of the world that have yet to be discovered.
Dr Nick Fraser, of National Museums Scotland, who worked on the fossils, said they represent a "critical step in the evolution of life on Earth".
"Without this step of vertebrates - animals with backbones - coming on to land, we wouldn't be here, birds wouldn't be here, crocodiles wouldn't be here, lizards, frogs, dinosaurs would never have roamed the Earth - all these things would not have evolved," he told BBC News.
People looking for fossils in Burnmouth in ScotlandImage copyrightR CLACK
Image caption
Fossils have also been found in Burnmouth on the east coast of Scotland
Around 360 million years ago, many life forms, including early fish, were wiped out in a mass extinction.
For the next 15 million years or so, a key time in tetrapod evolution, there is a gap in the fossil record.
This means we know very little about how fish-like animals grew the limbs that could support them on land.
Dr Fraser said the focus of attention is on Scotland, as it may be the place where these animals "first colonised land".
"These are the oldest animals with four legs that were able to move around on land," he said.
"If you want to draw the analogy to Neil Armstrong's first step on the Moon - it was one small step for man but a giant leap for mankind, well, this in some ways is a small step out of the water for these animals but it's a giant leap forward for the future evolution of life on land."
The fossils were found in a river near Chirnside in Berwickshire, ScotlandImage copyrightNMS
Image caption
The fossils were found in a river near Chirnside in Berwickshire, Scotland
Only a handful of sites in the world have yielded similar fossils from this time period.
One is in Scotland - in Dumbarton, west of Glasgow, where only a single fossil (Pederpes) has been unearthed.
Fragments of fossils have been found in the US and Canada.
Details of the latest discoveries are published in the journal Nature Ecology & Evolution.
Dr Per Ahlberg, of Uppsala University, Sweden, said the fossils "substantially change our picture of early tetrapod evolution".
And Dr Mike Coates, of the University of Chicago, said "they predict more diversity, earlier in the fossil record" and suggest "a greater range of extinction survivors among the early tetrapods".
Dr Jason Anderson, of the University of Calgary, said the fossils show that the apparent gap in the fossil record "is due to a lack of fossil collection, and not because there were no fossils because of low atmospheric oxygen".
Follow Helen on Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Genetic clue to how limbs evolved from fins
24 January 2014
Related Internet links

Nature Ecology & Evolution
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Soyuz Capsule
Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Tim Peake's capsule to arrive in UK
Felled forest (Getty Images)
Deforestation 'still cause for concern'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Deforestation 'still cause for concern'
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'We cannot hide from an uncomfortable truth'
'We cannot hide from an uncomfortable truth'
 Siberian man tracks down great-grandfather's executioners
Siberian man tracks down great-grandfather's executioners
 Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
Alligator snapping turtle's great escape
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Cirque du Soleil founder's son dies in on-stage accident
BBC News
Cirque du Soleil founder's son dies in on-stage accident
 Segregation at 'worrying levels' in parts of Britain, Dame Louise Casey warns
BBC News
Segregation at 'worrying levels' in parts of Britain, Dame Louise Casey warns
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 Welcome to Future Now
BBC Future
Welcome to Future Now
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
9 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 25 Italian Baby Names You'll Want to Steal
25 Italian Baby Names You'll Want to Steal
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous Countries
Travelers Beware: These Are the Most Dangerous…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB Team
These Are the Worst Players on Every 2016 MLB…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least and Most
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least and Most
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Surprising Health Benefit of Getting Your Hands (Literally) Dirty
The Surprising Health Benefit of Getting Your…
Men's Fitness
Can the Moon Actually Affect Your Sleep?
Can the Moon Actually Affect Your Sleep?
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
Glasgow Hotels
Read reviews & find deals at TripAdvisor now!
tripadvisor.com/Glasgow
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
