
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FOOTBALL
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
England Football Team
Results
Fixtures
Live Scores
All Teams
Leagues & Cups
Gareth Southgate: Adrian Bevington defends FA over Gareth Southgate interview

3 hours ago From the section Football
Share this page
 England interim manager Gareth Southgate
Gareth Southgate won 57 caps for England between 1995 and 2004
The Football Association's process to appoint the next England manager has been defended by former FA executive Adrian Bevington after Gareth Southgate had a three-hour interview on Monday.

Southgate, 46, was in charge for four games as interim manager and is the only candidate.

Ex-England striker Chris Sutton criticised the FA and said it was a "slap across the face" for Southgate.

But Bevington said: "Personally, I don't think it is overcomplicating it."

England Under-21 coach Southgate was interviewed by a five-person panel on Monday but no announcement is expected until any appointment is ratified at a full FA board meeting at the end of the month.

England won two World Cup qualifiers - 2-0 against Malta and 3-0 against Scotland - and drew another 0-0 away to Slovenia during Southgate's short stint in charge.

They also drew 2-2 with Spain in a friendly.

"Why make this meeting public?" Sutton told BBC Radio 5 live.

"Why couldn't they have had this meeting behind closed doors and then announced Gareth as manager?

"It's a little bit undermining, a bit of a slap across the face."

Bevington defended the process, adding: "I understand why there's the debate about why you need a formal process.

"It makes perfect sense if you've had an interim manager to have three or four days pass and then come back and review it with a clear head.

"I think Gareth's a pretty measured individual and getting back to the point of why it's in the public domain, those people around the table would have preferred for that not to be in the public domain."
Share this page
Find out more

Football Association

Read more on Football Association
Top Stories

West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
Jurgen Klinsmann
Klinsmann sacked as United States boss

6h From the section Football
Read more on Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
Related to this story

Southgate completes England job interview

11h From the section Football
Read more on Gareth Southgate: England interim boss completes interview
Southgate 'only candidate' for England

1d From the section Football
Read more on Gareth Southgate 'the only candidate' for England manager - Adrian Bevington
I can handle England job - Southgate

5d From the section Football
Read more on Gareth Southgate: Interim England manager says he has proved he can handle job
Southgate wants job call within a month

7d From the section Football
Read more on Gareth Southgate: Interim England manager wants future decided within a month

 
From Around the Web
 No. 1 bike maker Giant eyes global expansion
No. 1 bike maker Giant eyes global expansion
Nikkei Asian Review
The most addictive game of the year! Play with 14 million Players now!
The most addictive game of the year! Play with 14 million…
Forge Of Empires
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
25 Names Nobody Wants for Their Kid Anymore
25 Names Nobody Wants for Their Kid Anymore
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
51 Tom Hanks Movies Ranked from Worst to First
51 Tom Hanks Movies Ranked from Worst to First
PrettyFamous
Gamers around the world have been waiting for this game!
Gamers around the world have been waiting for this game!
Forge Of Empires
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
