
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
selected
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Politics
selected
Parliaments
Brexit
Supreme Court Brexit case: 'No need' for MPs to get final say
7 hours ago
 From the section UK Politics 4577 comments
Share

Media captionWhat is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
The government has urged the Supreme Court to make a decision the "ordinary man and woman" would understand in the landmark legal challenge over Brexit.
Government lawyer James Eadie QC said ministers could trigger Brexit and that there was no basis for Parliament to get the final say.
He faced a grilling from the 11 Supreme Court justices as he set out his case.
The government is appealing after last month's High Court ruling that MPs must be consulted before triggering Brexit.
Brexit Live: Rolling text and video updates
What is the Article 50 case all about?
Who are the 11 Supreme Court justices?
What if ministers lose?
Who is the woman behind the Brexit case?
There were queues going into the courtroom and protesters outside on day one of the hearing, which is expected to last four days, with a verdict due in January.
The outcome will have implications for Theresa May's strategy for EU exit, but it is not a court case on whether or not Brexit actually takes place.
In the first day at the Supreme Court:
Court president Lord Neuberger said the judges would consider issues impartially and decide the case according to the law
The government set out why it thinks it should be able to use "prerogative powers" to trigger Brexit
Ministers have the power to make or unmake treaties, it said
It said the powers were not a "relic" but a key part of the constitution
Parliament could have chosen to restrict ministers' power to act but had chosen not to, it said
Mr Eadie said Parliament had "carefully selected" which areas it wanted to control, and that where it had not, executive power should apply
At the start of the hearing, Supreme Court president Lord Neuberger said the justices were aware of the public interest in the case and the "strong feelings associated with the many wider political questions surrounding the United Kingdom's departure from the European Union".
But he added: "This appeal is concerned with legal issues, and, as judges, our duty is to consider those issues impartially, and to decide the case according to the law."
He also said some of the people involved in the case had received "threats of serious violence and unpleasant abuse in emails and other electronic communications", warning anyone that such behaviour "undermines the rule of law".
Analysis
Supreme Court
By Dominic Casciani, BBC Home Affairs Correspondent
Today was exactly the kind of scenario that the Supreme Court was set up to answer: the biggest question of the day - if not decades.
Inside court one, we had the unprecedented scene of 11 justices and some of the beefiest legal teams in the country.
Proceedings were, like many Supreme Court hearings, an intellectual contest conducted with warmth, civility and good humour - an examination of what the UK's uncodified constitution means.
Outside it was different - protesters from both sides. Some good humoured, some not. One shouted "traitor" at Gina Miller as she left court, having exercised her legal right to challenge the government.
Who's winning? Hard to tell.
After lunch the justices gave the government team a tough time - but at this level you can't read anything into that.
That's what they are there to do: test to the limits the claims being made, define the line and uphold the rule of law that protects our democracy.
The UK voted to leave the EU, by a margin of 51.9% to 48.1%, in a referendum in June.
The prime minister has said she intends to officially notify the rest of the EU of the UK's intention to leave - beginning two years of talks over the terms of separation - using Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty by the end of March.
But campaigners, led by investment manager Gina Miller and hairdresser Deir Dos Santos, insist that decision can be taken only by Parliament.
The points at stake

Media captionWhat will the Supreme Court be considering in the Article 50 case?
The case is about whether the law means that the government needs the authority of Parliament to trigger the process for the UK to leave the EU
The government argues it can start the Article 50 process using "prerogative powers", a remnant of the era of all-powerful kings and queens
Justices will be ruling on who has the legal power to change the rights of British citizens
Read legal correspondent Clive Coleman's full analysis
Monday's hearing began with Attorney General Jeremy Wright setting out the government's case.
He said the "royal prerogative" powers the government wants to use to trigger Article 50 were not an "ancient relic" but a "fundamental pillar of our constitution as a sovereign state".
The government did not seek to use the prerogative "on a whim", he said.
Supreme Court president Lord Neuberger
Image caption
Supreme Court president Lord Neuberger said the court was aware of the public interest in the case
Mr Wright said the legislation enabling the EU referendum had been passed with the "clear expectation" that the government would implement the result, and that Parliament had had the opportunity to restrict the government's power to trigger Article 50 but had chosen not to do so.
"If this is all about standing up for Parliament, I say Parliament can stand up for itself," he said.
Taking over the case, Mr Eadie said it would be "highly improbable" for Parliament, in passing legislation enabling the EU referendum, to have been merely "reserving to itself the right to decide whether to leave or not as it saw fit".
He said the result of the referendum could not be legally "irrelevant", adding: "If you asked the ordinary man or woman on the street if they regarded the fact that a referendum has occurred as remotely relevant to the question of whether the government can give Article 50 notice, the answer would be 'Of course it is'."
Gina Miller arrives at the Supreme CourtImage copyrightAP
Image caption
Gina Miller says she has received death threats after bringing the case
Attorney General Jeremy WrightImage copyrightAFP/GETTY
Image caption
Attorney General Jeremy Wright is representing the government
Earlier this year the High Court ruled in Ms Miller's favour, arguing that rights conferred by Parliament when it passed the 1972 European Communities Act - which paved the way for the UK to join the then European Economic Community, the EU's predecessor - were likely to be affected by Brexit.
As a result, it concluded, any process leading to the potential withdrawal of rights could only be determined by Parliament.
In its judgement, the High Court ruled "the powerful constitutional principle that the Crown has no power to alter the law of the land by use of its prerogative powers is the product of an especially strong constitutional tradition in the UK".
The ruling led to criticism from some elements of the press and Brexit-supporting MPs, but in her submission ahead of Monday's hearing, Ms Miller said the Court had a "duty to decide questions of law".

Media captionShami Chakrabarti tells Radio 4's Today programme we should not vilify judges
Labour has said it will try to amend an Article 50 bill - if one is required - to ensure single market access and workers' rights are protected.
Shadow attorney-general Baroness Chakrabarti told Radio 4's Today programme: "We have been completely clear that we are democrats and respect the outcome of the referendum, even though many of us - myself included - campaigned in the opposite direction."
Protesters at Brexit Supreme Court caseImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Some protesters - and their pets - came to the Supreme Court ahead of the hearing
The Supreme Court will also consider two legal challenges to the exercise of prerogative powers brought by Northern Irish campaigners.
The Scottish and Welsh Governments have also been granted permission to intervene in the case to establish matters of important legal and constitutional principle, including the basis on which the Article 50 process might need to be sanctioned by their devolved legislatures.
Other interested parties and intervening groups - who will be making oral arguments before the court - include citizens of European Economic Area countries living in the UK known as AB parties, and Grahame Pigney's crowd-funded People's Challenge.
Ministers will have a number of options if they lose the appeal, but it has been reported that a 16-word bill is being prepared which could be fast-tracked though Parliament, asking MPs and peers "to give permission" to the government to trigger Article 50 in time to meet the March deadline.
Mrs May will be given an indication of the scale of parliamentary opposition she faces over Brexit on Wednesday, with a potential revolt over demands for the government to set out its plan for leaving the EU before triggering Article 50.
Labour will use an opposition day debate to force a vote on the issue.
BBC assistant political editor Norman Smith said up to 40 Conservatives could vote with Labour.
Ministers have refused to offer a "running commentary" on their Brexit strategy.
View comments
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

What is the Article 50 case all about?
4 December 2016
What next if the government loses its Brexit appeal?
3 December 2016
The 11 Supreme Court judges who could rule on UK's Brexit appeal
4 November 2016
UK Politics
Muslim women cross a road in west London, File photo - May 2014
Segregation at 'worrying levels'
5 December 2016
 From the section UK
Full article Segregation at 'worrying levels'
Nigel Farage
Farage on Time's person of year list
5 December 2016
 From the section UK Politics
Full article Farage on Time's person of year list
Prison officer
Ministers 'in jail dispute mind games'
5 December 2016
 From the section UK
Full article Ministers 'in jail dispute mind games'
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Are Boris Johnson's jokes lost in translation?
Are Boris Johnson's jokes lost in translation?
 Prepare for disappearing credit cards
Prepare for disappearing credit cards
 'It's lovely to find out about their lives'
'It's lovely to find out about their lives'
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
 Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
Lorraine McCausland raped and murdered by people linked to the UDA
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Duran Duran 'shocked' after losing legal copyright battle
BBC News
Duran Duran 'shocked' after losing legal copyright battle
 Barnsley man jailed for raping young girl
BBC News
Barnsley man jailed for raping young girl
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
BBC Future
Why humans should be wary of widening the intelligence gap
UK Politics live reporting
LIVE Brexit Live: Supreme Court case
Full article Brexit Live: Supreme Court case
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 A 2016 picture showing Vera Sommerfeld, 96, with her adult descendants - and the sixth generation, newborn baby Callie.
Six generations
Great-great-great grandmother gets ready for Christmas
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Discovering the Road to Clean Energy Through Innovation
Discovering the Road to Clean Energy Through…
Dassault Systemes
Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Dassault Systemes
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
See Which Actress is the Same Age as You
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Most
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Most
InsideGov | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
U.S. Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Ranking 2016's Least Valuable Players of 2016
Ranking 2016's Least Valuable Players of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
