BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
selected
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
England
selected
Regions
Suffolk
selected
ADVERTISEMENT

Sutton Hoo bitumen links Syria with Anglo-Saxon England
1 December 2016
 From the section Suffolk
Share
Sutton Hoo warrior's helmetImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
One of the greatest finds at the Sutton Hoo boat burial is this warrior's helmet, which is kept at the British Museum in London
Analysis of black organic fragments found in the Sutton Hoo boat burial has revealed they are bitumen from Syria.
The Suffolk site was excavated in 1939. Gold and garnet jewellery, silverware and ceremonial armour were discovered.
The small black objects scattered among the 7th Century finds were believed to be pine tar used for boat maintenance.
British Museum and Aberdeen University experts have revealed they are bitumen and said they demonstrated the "far-reaching" Anglo-Saxon trade network.
Sutton HooImage copyrightNATIONAL TRUST
Image caption
The burial ship was found in one of the mounds at Sutton Hoo, while other mounds contained items including a horse
Fragments of bitumen from Sutton HooImage copyrightBURGER ET AL. 2016
Image caption
The find shows even 1,000 years ago petrochemical products were being traded internationally, according to Dr Stephen Bowden from Aberdeen University
They believe the petrochemical scraps should now be viewed as "exotic grave goods which can be counted among the other treasures from the burial".
The discovery was made when the fragments were included in an EU-funded research project studying the preservation of tars associated with ancient boats.
Pauline Burger, who analysed the material while on a Marie Curie Fellowship at the museum, said the result was "completely unexpected".
She said: "To find some undiscovered imported grave goods instead was tremendously exciting."
Drawing of Sutton Hoo burial shipImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The British Museum said the bitumen should be seen as an exotic grave good and should be counted among the other treasures from the burial
The chemical fossils within "show this material comes from the Dead Sea family of bitumens, perhaps sourced in Syria", according to Stephen Bowden, from the University of Aberdeen.
Bitumen is a viscous or semi-solid oil deposit, which is also known as asphalt.
The British Museum has described archaeological finds of bitumen from ancient Britain as "extremely rare" - and said this is the first to be linked to the Middle East
The experts do not know if the fragments were part of a larger object whose other materials did not survive or the remains of small objects.
British Museum senior scientist Rebecca Stacey said: "Either way, it rewrites our understanding of the finds and shows that more than 75 years after its first discovery there is still much to be learnt about this remarkable burial assemblage".
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Anglo-Saxon find in Norfolk declared treasure
29 November 2016
Great Ryburgh dig finds 81 'rare' Anglo-Saxon coffins
16 November 2016
Anglo-Saxon 'palace' found at Rendlesham near Sutton Hoo site
20 September 2016
Sutton Hoo: Money available to develop historic Anglo-Saxon site
19 November 2015
Sutton Hoo: Replica of 'plundered' brooch in place at historical site
26 July 2014
Related Internet links

PLOS - Public Library of Science
The University of Aberdeen
British Museum
Sutton Hoo, National Trust
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Suffolk
Car driving wrong way on carriageway
Video: Car goes wrong way down A-road
5 December 2016
Full article Video: Car goes wrong way down A-road
Melanie Tucker
Mayor's chains stolen in break-in
5 December 2016
 From the section Suffolk
Full article Mayor's chains stolen in break-in
Corrie Mckeague
Missing Corrie's mum in Q&A session
5 December 2016
Full article Missing Corrie's mum in Q&A session
From other local news sites
Near miss on A14 after car drives wrong way on dual carriageway near Ipswich
East Anglian Daily Times
Train passengers face cancelled trains and long delays due to defective track
East Anglian Daily Times
Ipswich Icons - Artist Margaret Mary Tempest brought Little Grey Rabbit to life
Ipswich Star
Sudbury man found dead at home after alarm raised
Suffolk Free Press
Meet Santa in his Sudbury grotto
Suffolk Free Press
Stowmarket Christmas Tree Festival off to a magical start
Ipswich Star
About these results
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Farmers are reporting a large decline in the number of foreign fruit pickers
Farmers are reporting a large decline in the number of foreign fruit…
 Chernobyl shield completion like 'closing a nuclear wound'
Chernobyl shield completion like 'closing a nuclear wound'
 Smart duvet: the bed that makes itself
Smart duvet: the bed that makes itself
 Kieran Milledge jailed for train dog attack in Essex
Kieran Milledge jailed for train dog attack in Essex
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Anglo-Saxon find in Norfolk declared treasure
BBC News
Anglo-Saxon find in Norfolk declared treasure
 Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
BBC News
Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
 Duran Duran 'shocked' after losing legal copyright battle
BBC News
Duran Duran 'shocked' after losing legal copyright battle
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
 Driving tips from delivery people
BBC Autos
Driving tips from delivery people
 The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
BBC Autos
The petrol-station guidebook that changed gastronomy
Suffolk live reporting
LIVE BBC Local Live: Suffolk
9 hours ago
Car filmed going wrong way on main road
Full article BBC Local Live: Suffolk
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
9 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up Aviation
How Leading Pioneers Are Cleaning Up…
Dassault Systemes
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Dassault Systemes
The Most Dangerous Countries in the World to Travel to
The Most Dangerous Countries in the…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
10 Little-Known Facts About WWE Superstar John Cena
10 Little-Known Facts About WWE Superstar John…
Muscle & Fitness
Behind the Raid on Osama Bin Laden
Behind the Raid on Osama Bin Laden
Muscle and Fitness
15 Pro Athletes Who Served in the Military
15 Pro Athletes Who Served in the Military
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
Bachelor, Masters, PhD
Earn a Degree in your time with AIU self paced, and affordable program.
www.aiu.edu/
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
