BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
US & Canada
selected
US Election 2016
Trump: US to quit TPP trade deal on first day in office
51 minutes ago
 From the section US & Canada
Share

Media captionTrump unveils his priorities for his first day in the White House
Trump elected

The people around Donald Trump
Trump presidency: Your questions answered
The hotel developer who became president
Full coverage
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in the White House.
He made the announcement in a video message outlining what he intends to do first when he takes office in January.
The TPP trade deal was signed by 12 countries which together cover 40% of the world's economy.
The Republican also pledged to reduce "job-killing restrictions" on coal production and stop visa abuses.
But there was no mention of repealing Obamacare or building a wall on the southern border with Mexico, two actions he said during the campaign he would do as soon as he assumed power.
His surprise election win two weeks ago has sparked protests across the US.
The TPP was agreed in 2015 by countries including Japan, Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Mexico, but is not yet ratified.
Its aim was to deepen economic ties and boost growth but its opponents say it was negotiated in secret and it favours big corporations.
Reaction to Trump quitting TPP
"Not a surprise, but his trade policies will undermine the gains that TPP would have brought for the US." Parag Khanna, Centre on Asia and Globalisation
"Very depressing news. It means the end of US leadership on trade and the passing of the baton to Asia." Deborah Elms, Asian Trade Center
"The collapse of the TPP will now create a void in Asia. There is lots of talk about China now moving in to fill it. Harumi Taguchi, economist
Read reaction in full
What is the TPP and why does it matter?
Asia-Pacific leaders meeting in Peru over the weekend said they will continue to pursue free trade deals despite Mr Trump's opposition.
But on Monday, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said the TPP trade deal would be meaningless without the involvement of the US.
Analysis: Karishma Vaswani, Asia Business Correspondent
President-elect Trump signalling the death of the TPP is a big blow to many parts of emerging Asia. Sure, the other countries could go ahead, as some have signalled, and continue with the deal on their own - but what would be the point without unfettered access to the US market?
Vietnam and Malaysia were set to gain the most from the deal. They already have access to the US markets for their products, but were hoping to see tariffs on some of their key exports vanish altogether.
China could step in with a regional trade deal, also known as the RCEP. But would a Chinese initiated regional trade deal bring the same benefits? Not really, say some analysts - most Asian countries already have preferential access to China's markets under the China-ASEAN free trade agreement of 2010.
But you could see some Asian countries that were due to be excluded from the TPP - like the Philippines, Thailand and South Korea - benefit from the RCEP.

Media captionSingapore Prime Minister and Barack Obama defended the TPP
In the video message, Mr Trump said his governing agenda would be based on "putting America first".
The six executive actions he would take on day one are:
issuing notice of withdrawing from TPP
cancelling restrictions on US energy production
cutting regulations on businesses
ordering a plan to combat cyber-attacks
investigating visa abuses that undercut American workers
imposing a five-year ban on people leaving government to become lobbyists
The president-elect has spent the last week starting to put together his new team.
The people around Donald Trump
He said in the video that "truly great and talented men and women, patriots are being brought in and many will soon be a part of our government".
Kris Kobach and Mr TrumpImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Kris Kobach met Trump on Sunday, but the photographers focused on what he was holding
Kris Kobach papersImage copyrightAP
Image caption
His documents outlined a registration system for certain immigrants
Some key appointments have been made, but not without controversy.
Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions, who was turned down as a federal judge in 1986 due to racism complaints, will head the Justice Department.
And the news that Steve Bannon, former editor-in-chief of the conservative Breitbart website, was the new White House strategist was welcomed by former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke.
One of Trump's immigration advisers, Kris Kobach, was unwittingly photographed meeting him while holding a document on view that contained some hardline proposals.
Among them was the re-introduction of registration for people arriving from mostly Muslim countries, which was brought in after the September 11 attacks but later dropped.
More on the Trump transition
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
What can Trump learn from a wrestler?
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
Can Donald Trump get what he wants?
Trump takes office - full coverage
Related Topics
Donald Trump
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Trump elected

The people around Donald Trump
21 November 2016
Trump presidency: Your questions answered
14 November 2016
The hotel developer who became president
10 November 2016
Full coverage
18 November 2016
What will President Trump do first?
10 November 2016
Six ways the world could change
10 November 2016
Where Trump stands on key issues
9 November 2016
Five reasons Donald Trump won
9 November 2016
Full results
8 November 2016
As it happened: Trump in Obamacare U-turn
9 November 2016
US & Canada
handout photo provided by the Chattanooga Fire Department (CFD) shows emergency responders at the scene of a school bus crash in Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA, 21 November 2016.
Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
Jurgen Klinsmann
SPORT Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
21 November 2016
 From the section Football
Full article Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
Times Square
Yemeni man in NYC accused of IS plot
21 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Yemeni man in NYC accused of IS plot
 
More Videos from the BBC
 100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
 Japan Tsunami warning: 'Evacuate immediately'
Japan Tsunami warning: 'Evacuate immediately'
 Dog rescues boy from tumble dryer
Dog rescues boy from tumble dryer
 How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
How terminally-ill Heidi is preparing children for her death
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
BBC News
Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
 British woman 'arrested in Dubai after reporting rape'
BBC News
British woman 'arrested in Dubai after reporting rape'
 Home Office refuses to grant British man's wife a visa
BBC News
Home Office refuses to grant British man's wife a visa
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Driving the 'invincible' Tesla Model X
BBC Autos
Driving the 'invincible' Tesla Model X
 Why car designers stick with clay
BBC Autos
Why car designers stick with clay
 Australia’s hypersonic plane for a new space race
BBC Future
Australia’s hypersonic plane for a new space race
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
5
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
8
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
9
The fiery BBC interview that went viral in India
10
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
 
From Around the Web
 The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the List?
The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Ranking the 50 Most Famous Deceased Actors
Ranking the 50 Most Famous Deceased Actors
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
25 Parisian Baby Names
25 Parisian Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to learn a language!
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to…
Babbel
The Most Well-Known Actors Your Age
The Most Well-Known Actors Your Age
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Indonesian P2P industry seeks regulatory clarity
Indonesian P2P industry seeks regulatory clarity
Nikkei Asian Review
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
