BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Magazine
The 'Walter Mittys': Why do some people pose as heroes?
By Jon Kelly
BBC News Magazine
25 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Share
MedalsImage copyrightISTOCK
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
The city getting rich from fake news
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
Impostors who wear military medals they have not earned could face jail if a bill now before parliament is passed. What drives these "Walter Mittys" to invent fake tales of heroism?
Maybe it starts down the pub. There's talk of the SAS, and you've read all the books. An exaggeration becomes an embellishment, and then a lie.
People are impressed. You get carried away. Buy medals on eBay. Wear them to a Remembrance Day parade.
Then you slip up. You get a detail wrong and someone notices. You're exposed as a fraud. A Walter Mitty.
In military circles, the name of James Thurber's fictional fantasist is applied to the persistent band of hoaxers who, for whatever reason, boast of military records they haven't earned. Sometimes Walter Mitty is abbreviated to Walter, or just Walt.
One well-publicised case involved Roger Day, who admitted he hadn't earned the 17 medals - including awards for serving in World War II, the Military Medal and SAS badges - that he wore at a 2009 parade in Warwickshire.

Media captionRoger Day (highlighted) was exposed at a Remembrance Day march
In 2008, bus driver Jamie Barrett was spotted marching in Edinburgh with members of the Parachute Regiment who had served in the Falklands. He had bought his medals online. After he was exposed, Barrett said: "I'm basically a Walter Mitty type of person."
And last year, Oxford's town crier Anthony Church confessed to inventing a career in the armed forces. He had previously claimed he was a "regimental sergeant major" and had worn a Falklands medal.
Anthony Church
Image caption
Anthony Church resigned as town crier after he was exposed
Most people would regard the concoction of fake tales of heroism as reprehensible.
"It completely undermines genuine heroes," says Gareth Johnson, the MP for Dartford who introduced the proposed law - the Awards for Valour (Protection) Bill - that would make wearing unauthorised medals a criminal offence, punishable by prison or a £5,000 fine.
"People who have served their country in genuinely dangerous environments, then someone comes along and pretends that they are their equal - that causes a lot of offence," he says. "When people see veterans it's important that people have confidence their medals are legitimate."
Internet vigilante groups with names like the Walter Mitty Hunters Club are dedicated to uncovering and shaming them, and these exposes are regularly picked up and given extra publicity by an indignant tabloid press.
But what actually motivates the Walter Mittys to concoct their often elaborate tales is not always obvious.
In Day's case, a court was told he had started to make up stories to impress his new wife, who was 24 years his junior.
Confronted after his exposure, Barrett's explanation for his behaviour was more prosaic: "I had been collecting the medals and silliness got hold of me. I got a bit carried away, put the medals on and went. I didn't realise that it would upset other people."
eBay
One of the more spectacular cases of recent times involved Capt Sir Alan McIlwraith, CBE, DSO, MC, MiD - or, rather, plain Alan McIlwraith, a call-centre worker living on a Glasgow council estate who built up an elaborate fake persona as a highly decorated officer who had finished top of his class at Sandhurst and served in the Balkans.
"The lie had just gone too deep, it's like a weed that invades your life. Once it's taken root, there's nothing you can do about it," McIlwraith, who was exposed as a fraud in 2006, told the Guardian.
Some will have had no involvement with the armed forces whatsoever, Greenberg says. But others might embellish their own military service into something more impressive-sounding.
Richard Lee claimed he had served with the Royal Marines' mountain troops when he set up the worldwide endurance competition, Spartan Race. In fact, it turned out he had enrolled in the Officer Training Corps but dropped out before qualifying.
Just how many Walter Mittys there are isn't entirely clear.
In evidence to the Commons Defence Committee, the Royal British Legion (RBL) said it in its experience "instances of so-called 'Walter Mittys' appear to be rare" while the The Royal Air Force Families Federation said the issue was "not widespread".
However, 64% of 1,111 Naval Families Federation members surveyed over four days said they had personally encountered individuals wearing medals or insignia that had been awarded to someone else. Gareth Johnson says his own RBL branch has had to expel two members who concocted bogus military records.
Neil Greenberg, professor of defence mental health at King's College London, also argues that the phenomenon is more widespread than you might expect.
"I've seen more people who say they were at the Iranian embassy siege than were actually at the Iranian embassy siege," he says.
RAF uniformImage copyrightISTOCK
Gareth Johnson says the UK is highly unusual in not already having legislation of the kind he proposes. The wearing of medals without authorisation was made illegal by Winston Churchill after World War One - but in 2006, when the new Armed Forces Act came into effect, this was effectively repealed.
So although Roger Day pleaded guilty to falsely wearing medals in 2010, a community order imposed on him was scrapped after his lawyer noticed that this had stopped being an offence 11 days before the parade.
Under the Fraud Act, anyone who uses medals for financial gain can be prosecuted - but if no such benefit can be proved, no offence has been committed. One man who did gain financially is Christopher Griffin, a bodyguard who falsely claimed to have been a British Army Captain for 11 years, who admitted two counts of fraud by false representation at Plymouth Magistrates Court last year.
MedalsImage copyrightISTOCK
Neil Greenberg, who has assessed several military impostors, isn't convinced that stricter legislation will deter them.
"It's often not fully conscious," he says. They are typically fairly pathetic individuals, as he puts it, who are "doing it to bolster their own self-esteem".
"Their problems are greater than that they say they were in the SAS," he says. Many will have an "abnormal or end-of-normal personality", while a few will have serious mental health problems.
Critics have warned that the bill before Parliament would end up targeting people who were mentally ill. Johnson says it would be up to the Crown Prosecution Service to decide whether it was in the public interest to prosecute any individual accused of wearing medals they hadn't earned.
He also says that people who wear medals won by relatives, to honour their memory, would not face prosecution.
Grey line 2 pixels
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty posterImage copyrightALAMY
Walter Mitty
In James Thurber's short story, The Secret Life of Walter Mitty, the mild-mannered hero imagines himself as a fighter pilot, an assassin and a brilliant surgeon
It was first published in the New Yorker in 1939 and adapted for the screen twice - first in 1947, with Danny Kaye in the title role, and again in 2013, starring Ben Stiller
The name "Walter Mitty" entered the lexicon, with Oxford Dictionaries defining it as "a person who fantasises about a life much more exciting and glamorous than their own"
Grey line 2 pixels
Johnson's proposed law has won the backing of ministers. "I fully support this bill," Defence Secretary Michael Fallon says. "Medals recognise our forces who risk their lives for our freedom. It's important their service is properly protected."
The Commons Defence Committee also backs the legislation. In its report on the proposed law, it concluded there is "a tangible and identifiable harm created by military impostors". Its chairman, Julian Lewis, said such "contemptible fantasists" need to be deterred.
Even without the threat of prosecution, being unmasked as a Walter Mitty in the media or online can be devastating in its own right. The BBC contacted a number of men who had been unmasked as impostors. None was prepared to speak on the record, but several spoke of their deep shame and said they had contemplated suicide.
Many will have no sympathy. But Greenberg says everyone should examine their own capacity for Walt-like behaviour.
"Most people exaggerate," he says. "There's an element of this in all of us."
Join the conversation - find us on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and Twitter.
Have you ever worn medals you hadn't earned? Let us know using the form below.
Your contact details
Name

Your E-mail address (required)

Town & Country

Your telephone number

Comments (required)

If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on. In some cases a selection of your comments will be published, displaying your name as you provide it and location, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published. When sending us pictures, video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others, take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws. Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions.
Terms and conditions
Send
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
In today's Magazine

Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
Video Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
100 Women 2016: I am a 'surrendered wife’
4 December 2016
'I was there when gunmen tried to kill Bob Marley'
4 December 2016
Magazine
Luther Windley
Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Manila at night
Video
Video
Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Manila's brutal nightshift
Hands typing on keyboard
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article The city getting rich from fake news
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Panfilov's 28 Men: Is Russian war movie the whole story?
Panfilov's 28 Men: Is Russian war movie the whole story?
 'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
'Never again' say stuck ferry passengers
 Niccolo Machiavelli 'has jumped cultures' says McTernan
Niccolo Machiavelli 'has jumped cultures' says McTernan
 What is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
What is Supreme Court Brexit case all about?
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
BBC News
The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
 Boris Johnson: UK should not pay 'large sums' for EU trade access
BBC News
Boris Johnson: UK should not pay 'large sums' for EU trade access
 Prince Harry visits children's home on Caribbean tour
BBC News
Prince Harry visits children's home on Caribbean tour
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
BBC Autos
Driving Aston Martin's £1.6m power boat
 Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
BBC Future
Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
 Using school buses to democratise wi-fi
BBC Autos
Using school buses to democratise wi-fi
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to learn a language!
100 yr-old man shows that you're never too old to…
Babbel
10 Little-Known Facts About WWE Superstar John Cena
10 Little-Known Facts About WWE Superstar John…
Muscle & Fitness
The Most Dangerous Countries in the World to Travel to
The Most Dangerous Countries in the…
Global Disease and Injury Impact | HealthGrove
The Most Popular Musicians
The Most Popular Musicians
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least
U.S. Presidents Who Accomplished the Least
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Ranking Every Clint Eastwood Movie
Ranking Every Clint Eastwood Movie
PrettyFamous
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
