
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
selected
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT
Science & Environment
Tim Peake spacecraft will arrive in UK in 2017
By Pallab Ghosh
Science correspondent, BBC News
5 December 2016
 From the section Science & Environment
Share
Soyuz CapsuleImage copyrightNASA/BILL INGALLS
Image caption
For sale: one Soyuz capsule, three careful owners. Slightly singed
The UK has bought the capsule which sent Tim Peake into space and returned him to Earth.
BBC News has learned that the vehicle will be go on display in the Science Museum in London in early 2017.
The Russian Soyuz TMA-19M craft has been refurbished, but is still slightly singed from re-entry into the Earth's atmosphere.
Major Peake told BBC News that he was "absolutely delighted" to hear his spacecraft would be brought to the UK.
"Hopefully it may act as an inspiration for the next generation of scientists and engineers," he said.
"Flying into space is a huge privilege but it also comes with risk and one of the highest risk areas are launch into space and re-entry into the Earth's atmosphere.
"The Soyuz spacecraft is designed to protect the crew from these harsh conditions. So you get very attached to your spacecraft because it definitely does save your life."
Tim Peake with the Soyuz TM14 capsuleImage copyrightSCIENCE MUSEUM
Image caption
Tim Peake with a Soyuz capsule similar to the one that took him into space
Britain's first astronaut, Helen Sharman, said she hoped the acquisition would have an inspirational effect.
"I think it is a tremendous thing to have Tim's capsule. Not just a Soyuz capsule - but it is Tim's. And the fact that we know that our astronaut was actually inside it - he physically sweated inside that suit, he looked outside of that window and saw what it was like to re-enter Earth's atmosphere - it really provides us with the link to our own astronauts," she told BBC News.
The space suit used by Ms Sharman on her mission to the Mir space station in 1991 is on display at the Science Museum.
She said that it was important to have real artefacts that had actually been in orbit for people in the UK to view.
Soyuz rocket and crew moduleImage copyrightPAUL RINCON
Image caption
The capsule was attached to a Soyuz rocket a few days before launch in December 2015
"Even now, 25 years after my space flight, people want to touch me even though every cell in body has probably regenerated," she said.
"It is really significant (having Tim's Soyuz in the UK). It is not a mock up, it is not a simulator, it is not someone else's Soyuz. The fact that our own astronaut actually did things inside provides us with a connection to human spaceflight.
"It might only be psychological as it will look very similar to other Soyuz spacecraft that have actually re-entered the Earth's atmosphere, but it's not - this is Tim's."
The Science Museum's group director, Ian Blatchford, said he hoped that the museum's acquisition would help inspire future generations.
Soyuz returning to EarthImage copyrightNASA/BILL INGALLS
Image caption
The spacecraft returned to Earth in June. It will be on display in the Science Museum early next year
"It is a great honour to be here to officially acquire the first flown human spacecraft in the Science Museum Group collection, one which allowed Tim Peake to make his historic journey to the International Space Station which we plan to share with the public," he said.
Ms Sharman said that seeing the spacecraft would make children believe that they too might be able to follow in Tim Peake's footsteps.
"I think that is the whole point about all this - the fact that someone else sat in that seat. Well you know what? So can they," she said.
"Astronauts might be well trained - but basically we are just people, like everybody else. And there are many other people we hope will be inspired - if not to go into space themselves one day, to think about the science that enables astronauts to go into space and make the world a better place."
Follow Pallab on Twitter
Related Topics
Space exploration
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

UK astronaut Tim Peake returns to Earth
18 June 2016
First UK astronaut calls for more Brits in space
17 May 2016
Related Internet links

Science Museum
Principia Mission
UK Space Agency
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Science & Environment
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
TBC
Fossils tell story of early life on land
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Fossils tell story of early life on land
Felled forest (Getty Images)
Deforestation 'still cause for concern'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Deforestation 'still cause for concern'
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Andrew Sachs: Fawlty Towers' 'I know nothing' scene
Andrew Sachs: Fawlty Towers' 'I know nothing' scene
 Uganda law student: 'My skirt really wasn't short'
Uganda law student: 'My skirt really wasn't short'
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
BBC News
Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
 Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
BBC News
Breast flash GMP police chief committed 'gross misconduct'
 German PoW leaves £384,000 to Perthshire village
BBC News
German PoW leaves £384,000 to Perthshire village
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The Rolls-Royce 'high-sided vehicle' comes into focus
BBC Autos
The Rolls-Royce 'high-sided vehicle' comes into focus
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
Top Stories
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
Thousands flock to pay their respects to J Jayalalitha, one of India's most popular politicians.
9 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Collage of women on who may be on the banknote
On the money
A woman is going on Canada's money but which one?
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Famous Actors With Famous Parents
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make the List?
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Ranked: The Best Western Movies Ever
Ranked: The Best Western Movies Ever
PrettyFamous
The Surprising Health Benefit of Getting Your Hands (Literally) Dirty
The Surprising Health Benefit of Getting Your…
Men's Fitness
Can the Moon Actually Affect Your Sleep?
Can the Moon Actually Affect Your Sleep?
Men's Fitness
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for Cleaner Energy
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for…
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
