BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
'It is time to make' three-person babies
By James Gallagher
Health and science reporter, BBC News website
30 November 2016
 From the section Health
Share
BabyImage copyrightTHINKSTOCK
It is time to start making babies from three people, according to scientists advising the UK's fertility regulator.
The move has been described as "historic", and the regulator will make its decision next month.
Doctors want to make babies from three people to prevent diseases that starve the body of energy, leading to brain damage, muscle wasting and heart failure.
However, fresh evidence suggests it will fail in one in eight pregnancies.
Three-person IVF replaces the defective power packs in the mother's egg - called mitochondria - with healthy ones from a donor woman.
A three-person baby has most of its genetic inheritance from its parents, but also a tiny amount from the donor woman.
Parliament has already legalised the controversial procedure, and a baby has been born from the technique in Mexico.
However, there have been calls for extra checks on the science before it goes ahead in the UK.
Prof Robin Lovell-Badge, one of the researchers who reviewed the evidence, said the moment had come.
"We're not going to learn much more now unless you try it out for real basically - it's at that stage," he said.
"There's no reason why it shouldn't go ahead now, but do it cautiously on selected patients where the risk of having a badly affected child is very high."
line break
Diagram showing structure of a cell
The structure of a cell
Nucleus: where the majority of our DNA is held - this determines how we look and our personality
Mitochondria: often described as the cell's factories, these create the energy to make the cell function
Cytoplasm: the jelly-like substance that contains the nucleus and mitochondria
line break
However, the technique can still lead to some defective mitochondria ending up in the resulting embryo.
A study, published in Nature, suggests those defective mitochondria could still take over in one in eight babies and cause disease.
Researchers at Oregon Health and Science Unit created embryos from four women who had children with mitochondrial disease.
Samples of those embryonic cells were then grown in the laboratory.
Prof Paula Amato, who published her findings in the journal Nature, said: "Some embryonic stem cell lines did revert back to the mutant mitochondrial DNA."
The scientific review team has recommended extra checks during pregnancy to ensure the baby is healthy.
Prof Lovell-Badge said: "It's likely to be something we have to worry about if the experiments that have been done on embryonic stem cells are representative of embryos that were re-implanted.
"That's why we recommend a pre-natal diagnosis method to check whether reversion is occurring in the developing foetus."
A team in Newcastle has pioneered research in the field and is likely to be the first to be given a licence to make three-person babies.
Prof Doug Turnbull, from Newcastle University, said: "This is obviously great news, and I agree with the report conclusions.
"I think the report highlights the very careful way in which the UK has proceeded with this new IVF technique and hope the HFEA [Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority] approve this at their meeting in December."
Commenting on the report, Prof Bert Smeets, from Maastricht University, said: "It is historic that the independent science review panel concludes that it is appropriate to offer mitochondrial donation techniques as clinical risk reduction treatment for carefully selected patients."
Follow James on Twitter.
Related Topics
Medical research
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Three-person baby 'race' dangerous
12 October 2016
UK approves three-person babies
24 February 2015
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Young men and women on the beach
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
6 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
HIV
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Fish are 'intelligent and emotional'
Fish are 'intelligent and emotional'
 Former youth football coach Hugh Stevenson accused of child abuse
Former youth football coach Hugh Stevenson accused of child abuse
 Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard appear at Allied premiere.
Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard appear at Allied premiere.
 Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Terminally ill Devon baby 'may die before car funding'
Terminally ill Devon baby 'may die before car funding'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
BBC News
Abducted California mother Sherri Papini had 'message' branded on skin
 Card game ditches 'Trump' name as 'brand disaster'
BBC News
Card game ditches 'Trump' name as 'brand disaster'
 Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
BBC News
Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
BBC Future
Chocolate vs vegetables: The true environmental costs
 The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
BBC Future
The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Thousands mourn India's 'iron lady'
2 minutes ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 The Most Famous Celebrities With Famous Parents
The Most Famous Celebrities With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Here Are the 27 Most Intelligent Presidents
Here Are the 27 Most Intelligent Presidents
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Most Famous Musician Born in Every Year
The Most Famous Musician Born in Every Year
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
Could Your Gut Bacteria Make You Tired All the Time?
Could Your Gut Bacteria Make You Tired All the Time?
Men's Fitness
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for Cleaner Energy
Powering Up: Why We Need to Fuel Innovation for…
Dassault Systemes
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UFO는 왜 날아 오는가
무료 eBook 증정 모든 해답은 여기에 미래 미스테리서클 우주인 ET 우주
www.rael.org
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
