
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
selected
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Business
selected
Market Data
Markets
Economy
Companies
Entrepreneurship
Technology of Business
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Trains and track come together in rail management revamp
3 hours ago
 From the section Business
Share
Workers on the line
The way that England's railway network is run is set to be overhauled under plans outlined by Transport Secretary Chris Grayling.
He wants each rail franchise to be run by joint management teams, including representatives from both the train operating company and Network Rail.
Mr Grayling said: "I intend to start bringing back together the operation of track and train on our railways."
The changes will start when each franchise is renewed in the future.
The minister stressed that he wanted his proposed changes to lead to a big improvement in service for passengers, who are travelling on an increasingly crowded and expensive network.
"We need to change the relationship between the tracks and the trains on the railway," Mr Grayling said.
"In my experience passengers don't understand the division between the two.
"They just want someone to be in charge. They want their train to work. I agree with them," he added.
The plan to make England's railways run better, day-to-day, will involve each franchise being run by one joint team, even though the franchise owner and Network Rail will continue to exist separately as at present.

Media captionRailway operation in England to be reformed, says transport minister
The first new, joint management teams will come into operation when the South Eastern and the East Midlands franchises are re-let in 2018.
The proposed shake-up will reverse some of the effects of the huge rail privatisation project which was controversially initiated in 1993 by John Major's Conservative government.
That change broke up the old state-owned British Rail and separated the ownership and management of the UK's rail infrastructure - such as rails, stations and signalling - from the ownership and control of the trains and services running on it.
Analysis
By Richard Westcott, BBC transport correspondent
I have never met anyone, no matter what their politics, who thinks it was a good idea to have one company running the trains and another running the track they run on.
But that's what they decided to do when they privatised the network 20 or so years ago.
I've heard of crazy situations, where train companies made money out of Network Rail when it overran on engineering work (they had to pay a fine).
Then the firm would make extra money running the replacement bus service too.
Different companies with different priorities.
Now Chris Grayling has become the latest transport secretary to try to get Network Rail working as one with private companies to fix the problems together, rather than arguing about whose fault it is.
They are already trying something like it across Scotland and with South West Trains.
As for getting one private company running everything on a future Cambridge to Oxford line, some fear it's an attempt to privatise rail repairs, which ended disastrously under Railtrack.
Speaking to the transport secretary though, he told me that he had no intention of making radical changes across the network, or breaking up Network Rail.
He just wanted the public and private sector, train and tracks, to work together, not against each other.
The separation of rail infrastructure from train operation is held by some critics to be a significant source of delays to management decisions, repairs and therefore to train services.
Reacting to the government's plan, Mark Carne, chief executive of Network Rail said: "We strongly welcome these plans to bring more joined up working within the industry.
"We have already devolved Network Rail into route-based businesses closer to customers, and the proposals announced today will build on the alliances we have created between these route businesses and train operators."
Varsity line
The new management approach may also be applied to the running of the revived "Varsity Line", which the government wants to see running between Oxford and Cambridge.
Confirmation was made in the recent Autumn Statement that this line, closed in the 1960s, should be rebuilt and reopened.
When it is functioning, the line will be run by a new body called East West Rail, which will be separate from Network rail and which will oversee the design and construction of the route as well as its subsequent operation.
Mr Grayling said: "The new organisation will work hand in glove with the National Infrastructure Commission as it plans the development of this nationally important transport corridor to identify the best way to deliver the project."
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Safety fears raised over government railway plans
4 December 2016
Train fares to rise by average of 2.3%
2 December 2016
Calls for devolved Network Rail backed
29 November 2016
Oxford-Cambridge rail link gets £110m funding
23 November 2016
Business
Mark Carney
Carney warns about disillusioned poor
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Carney warns about disillusioned poor
A copy of the local Chinese magazine Global People with a cover story that translates to 
Trump in Twitter outburst against China
5 December 2016
 From the section China 438 comments
Full article Trump in Twitter outburst against China
NYSE traders
Dow rises to a fresh record close
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Dow rises to a fresh record close
 
More Videos from the BBC
 100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
 The Indian village that has returned to bartering
The Indian village that has returned to bartering
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Car filmed going in wrong direction on A14 near Ipswich
Car filmed going in wrong direction on A14 near Ipswich
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 Link between Shenzhen and HK stock markets goes live
Link between Shenzhen and HK stock markets goes live
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Jayalalitha: The 'goddess' of Tamil Nadu politics
BBC News
Jayalalitha: The 'goddess' of Tamil Nadu politics
 French town told park's Virgin Mary statue must go
BBC News
French town told park's Virgin Mary statue must go
 Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
BBC News
Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
BBC Future
The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
 The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
BBC Future
The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Dassault Systemes
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
These Couples Rule Hollywood
These Couples Rule Hollywood
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Aged 35 he speaks 11 languages - his 11 tricks to learn any language
Aged 35 he speaks 11 languages - his 11 tricks to learn…
Babbel
Ranked: The Best Western Movies Ever
Ranked: The Best Western Movies Ever
PrettyFamous
These Are the Most Unhealthy Dog Breeds
These Are the Most Unhealthy Dog Breeds
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UFO는 왜 날아 오는가
무료 eBook 증정 모든 해답은 여기에 미래 미스테리서클 우주인 ET 우주
www.rael.org
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
