BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
US & Canada
selected
US Election 2016
Trump transition: Will General 'Mad Dog' Mattis lead Pentagon?
8 hours ago
 From the section US & Canada
Share
General James Mattis testifies before the Senate Armed Services Committee hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC.Image copyrightAP
Trump elected

The people around Donald Trump
Trump presidency: Your questions answered
The hotel developer who became president
Full coverage
"Be polite, be professional, but have a plan to kill everybody you meet."
That's the stark advice given to Marines in Iraq in 2003 by retired four-star General James Mattis, President-elect Donald Trump's possible Defence Secretary.
Gen Mattis, who is dubbed "Mad Dog", is known as much for his uncompromising approach to America's enemies as for his memorable turn of phrase.
The 66-year-old's quotes, or #mattisisms, have been faithfully shared online by veterans who revere his candour and leadership, much of it served at the spear tip of battle.
After meeting him on Saturday, Mr Trump said Gen Mattis - who had a 44-year career with the Marine Corps - was "the real deal" and "a true General's General".
'Warrior Monk'
While rising through the ranks, Gen Mattis also earned the nickname "Warrior Monk" because he never married or had children.
President-elect Donald Trump speaks as he stands with retired United States Marine Corps general James Mattis after their meeting at Trump International Golf Club.Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
President-elect Donald Trump stands with General Mattis after the two met at Trump International Golf Club in New Jersey
He retired in 2013 after serving as head of US Central Command (Centcom), the American military's wing in charge of all its Middle East forces.
Gen Mattis was an outspoken critic of the Obama administration's Middle East policy, specifically its views on Iran.
He has called Iran "the single most enduring threat to stability and peace in the Middle East".
Before he was promoted to lead Centcom in 2010, Gen Mattis was appointed as the head of US Joint Forces Command and Nato Supreme Allied Commander in 2007.
Gen James Mattis, in his own words
"I don't lose any sleep at night over the potential for failure. I cannot even spell the word."
"The first time you blow someone away is not an insignificant event. That said, there are some assholes in the world that just need to be shot."
"I come in peace. I didn't bring artillery. But I'm pleading with you, with tears in my eyes: If you [expletive] with me, I'll kill you all."
"The most important six inches on the battlefield is between your ears."
"There is nothing better than getting shot at and missed. It's really great."
"I'm going to plead with you, do not cross us. Because if you do, the survivors will write about what we do here for 10,000 years."
(Source: San Diego Union Tribune)
Gen Mattis led an assault battalion during the first Gulf war in 1991 and commanded a task force into southern Afghanistan in 2001.
He also helmed a Marine division at the time of the Iraq invasion in 2003 and played a key role a year later in the Battle of Fallujah.
Gen Mattis co-authored a counterinsurgency manual, which was credited for easing sectarian violence in Iraq before the US withdrawal in December 2011.
Iraqi General Mohammed Latif (R), head of the Fallujah Brigade, gestures as he stands near US Marines General James Mattis in May 2004.Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
General Mattis stands with Iraqi General Mohammed Latif, head of the Fallujah Brigade, in May 2004
But his refusal to mince words has been both celebrated and censured.
In 2005, Gen Mattis came under fire for comments made while talking to service members in San Diego.
"It's fun to shoot some people. I'll be right up there with you. I like brawling," he said at a panel discussion.
"You go into Afghanistan, you got guys who slap women around for five years because they didn't wear a veil.
"You know, guys like that ain't got no manhood left anyway. So it's a hell of a lot of fun to shoot them."
The Marine Corps said at the time the general had been spoken to about his remarks and agreed "he should have chosen his words more carefully".
Though Gen Mattis is considered a top choice for the job, he faces a hurdle if appointed as Pentagon chief.
A retired officer is required to be out of uniform for at least seven years before he or she can serve as defence secretary.
Gen Mattis, who has only been retired for three years, would require a formal waiver from the Republican-controlled Congress to qualify for the role.
His confirmation would make him the country's second retired general to serve as Pentagon chief.
Army General George Marshall received a congressional waiver to serve as President Harry Truman's defence secretary in 1950. He had previously served as President Truman's Secretary of State.
Related Topics
Donald Trump
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Trump elected

The people around Donald Trump
21 November 2016
Trump presidency: Your questions answered
14 November 2016
The hotel developer who became president
10 November 2016
Full coverage
18 November 2016
What will President Trump do first?
10 November 2016
Six ways the world could change
10 November 2016
Where Trump stands on key issues
9 November 2016
Five reasons Donald Trump won
9 November 2016
Full results
8 November 2016
As it happened: Trump in Obamacare U-turn
9 November 2016
US & Canada
Protesters in Washington
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
handout photo provided by the Chattanooga Fire Department (CFD) shows emergency responders at the scene of a school bus crash in Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA, 21 November 2016.
Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
Jurgen Klinsmann
SPORT Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
21 November 2016
 From the section Football
Full article Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 Former MI6 chief on Trump's 'worse scenario'
Former MI6 chief on Trump's 'worse scenario'
 Mosul battle: 'Don't be afraid, we're here to protect you'
Mosul battle: 'Don't be afraid, we're here to protect you'
 US Election 2016: Donald Trump's speech in full
US Election 2016: Donald Trump's speech in full
 Travel chaos as cars submerged in winter floods
Travel chaos as cars submerged in winter floods
 Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
Student Toby Pitts says loan error was 'devastating'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 US police officers shot in four attacks in one day
BBC News
US police officers shot in four attacks in one day
 Rory McGrath charged with stalking
BBC News
Rory McGrath charged with stalking
 Did the Queen stop Princess Margaret marrying Peter Townsend?
BBC News
Did the Queen stop Princess Margaret marrying Peter Townsend?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 We’ve got human intelligence all wrong
BBC Future
We’ve got human intelligence all wrong
 Australia’s hypersonic plane for a new space race
BBC Future
Australia’s hypersonic plane for a new space race
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
47 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
7 minutes ago
Dementia rates show 'signs of falling'
3 hours ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
6
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
7
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
10
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
Last updated 27 July 2016
 
From Around the Web
 Irish Baby Names That Are Popular in the U.S.
Irish Baby Names That Are Popular in the U.S.
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
100 Most Famous Actors to Ever Host "Saturday Night Live"
100 Most Famous Actors to Ever Host "Saturday Night…
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Robin Williams, Patrick Swayze and more: The Most Famous Deceased Actors
Robin Williams, Patrick Swayze and more: The Most…
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
These 25 French Names Are Trending Across the U.S.
These 25 French Names Are Trending Across…
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
These 23 Dog Breeds Are the Friendliest
These 23 Dog Breeds Are the Friendliest
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Behind the Raid on Osama Bin Laden
Behind the Raid on Osama Bin Laden
Muscle and Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
