BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
US & Canada
selected
US Election 2016
Melania Trump's White House snub: Appalling or good parenting?
5 hours ago
 From the section US & Canada
Share
US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York HiltonImage copyrightAFP
Image caption
Melania Trump (right) has shocked America after it emerged she is postponing her move
Trump elected

The people around Donald Trump
Trump presidency: Your questions answered
The hotel developer who became president
Full coverage
The revelation that Melania and Barron Trump would not be joining Donald in the White House in January has raised eyebrows in some quarters, and garnered praise in others.
The president-elect has said Mrs Trump and Barron will move to Washington "very soon, after he's finished with school", but has not put an actual date on the move.
But transition spokesman Jason Miller's insistence that the Trumps were "energised and excited about their new role serving the country" and it was simply concern about changing schools in the middle of the year did little to quell criticisms on social media.
"First Family resides in White House as a symbol of our country to us and and the world," wrote one Twitter user, Pamela Benbow. "Melania Trump's decision is appalling."
Others joked it was Mrs Trump's taste in interiors which had prompted the decision, while some began speculating about what the move said about the Trumps' marriage.
What do you think? Join the conversation - find us on Facebook
However, the strength of feeling is somewhat unsurprising. There are only two other First Ladies in the history of the United States who have not made the White House their home during their husbands' years as commander-in-chief: Martha Washington, because it had yet to be built, and Anna Harrison, because her husband died before she could take up residence.
The new first family: in detail
Who is Melania Trump?
What Melania's Twitter feed tells us
What Trump can learn from a wrestler and an action hero
But Mrs Trump's decision has its supporters.
"Good, this is what most responsible parents do with a child Barron's age," one Twitter user noted.
However, it is not out of character for Mrs Trump, who has repeatedly stressed that Barron, 10, is her focus - staying at home during the campaign to care for him in Trump Towers.
But they are far from the only mother and child to move into the White House. So how have families coped before?
How did other First Families manage the move?
President Bill Clinton (centre), First Lady Hillary Clinton and daughter Chelsea arrive at the White House in WashingtonImage copyrightAFP
Image caption
Chelsea Clinton, pictured with her parents on the White House lawn, would later remark her childhood was "normal" in many ways
William Seale, a White House Historical Association historian and author of The President's House, said President Grover Cleveland's wife, Frances Folsom Cleveland, only lived in the White House during social season.
The president bought a house during his first term, where Mrs Cleveland spent most of her time. The first lady referred to the first home as "Oak View" but it was more commonly known as "Red Top" because of its red roof.
But the young bride, who was age 21 when she married the 49-year-old president, was the only first lady to be married in the White House.
"The concern of children staying back to finish school - that's more typical than not," Mr Seale said.
"It seems not very unusual to me that she would want the child to finish this year of school. I don't find it very surprising."
Mr Seale noted that the children of President John Tyler, who became president after William Henry Harrison's death, were not immediately moved to the White House.
James Madison's wife, Dolley Madison, also sent her son from her first marriage, Payne Todd, away to school.
There have been two sets of school age children living in the White House in the past three decades: Chelsea Clinton, who was 12 at the time, and Malia and Sasha Obama, who were 10 and seven respectively.
They also had to move across the country when their fathers became president - but all three lived at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue from the day of the inauguration.
In fact, the Obamas avoided the problem of the girls having to change school mid-term by moving to Washington early, allowing them to start a new school a few weeks before Dad was inaugurated in January 2009.
Read more: Why Obama may not go quietly
What is a First Lady expected to do?

Media captionWhat was Melania Trump like in Slovenia?
Mrs Trump has indicated Barron will be her top priority, with everything else coming second. Reading between the lines, it suggests she will not be taking on the full-time role predecessors like Mrs Obama have.
Officially, the role of the first lady is only ceremonial - she is supposed to be the White House's hostess, organising and attending functions with or without their spouses.
In more recent times, they have also sought out causes to support and promote. Mrs Obama has used her time backing a number of initiatives and projects, including Let Girls Learn, that aims to help girls around the world go to school and stay in school.
The first lady occupies a very public role, according to Mr Seale.
"It gives a kind of personal side to the White House. It might even be considered vital to the public's perception of the president," he said. "[The president] is an administrator and a he is a symbol and I think the first lady's role is very important to that symbol part."
Lou Henry Hoover, wife to President Herbert Hoover, was the first president's wife to really take on an active public role, Mr Seale said.
Her immediate successor, Eleanor Roosevelt, also served as a more visible first lady in her husband's administration.
One notable first lady who was reluctant to step into the public role was Nancy Reagan, according to Mr Seale.
Mrs Reagan, who had a big influence on her husband's presidency and would later become known for her anti-drug campaign, was at first only focused on being a supportive wife.
"Her big interest in the world was her husband," Mr Seale said, adding that she was a very private person.
As to what Melania's priorities will be there is only one hint - she is interested in tackling cyber-bullying.
Read more: Taking to the streets for women's issues
Donald Trump speaking next to wife Melania and daughter IvankaImage copyrightAP
Image caption
Mr Trump's daughter Ivanka (far right) has helped him during the campaign
Could someone else fill in?
It has happened in the past. However, not when the president's wife has still been alive.
Thomas Jefferson's daughter Martha Jefferson Randolph took the role in 1801, while Angelica van Buren took up the duties of a first lady after marrying President Martin van Buren's son in 1838. Both men had lost their wives almost 20 years earlier.
However, could Ivanka Trump - described as her father's "proxy wife" by Vanity Fair during the election campaign - take up some of the responsibility from her step-mother?
There is more recent precedent, too. Chelsea performed some of her mother's duties during the final days of her father's presidency, while Mrs Clinton concentrated on her own political career.
Martha Jefferson Randolph (1772 - 1836), the daughter of the 3rd President of the United States of America, Thomas JeffersonImage copyrightHULTON ARCHIVE
Image caption
Martha Jefferson Randolph acted as First Lady for her father, Thomas Jefferson
Can the White House be child-friendly?
The White House can be whatever the family makes it.
Chelsea was known to do her homework in the Oval Office from time to time, while she also hosted sleepovers for friends - which could mean they found themselves sitting with the President the next morning, as Bill Clinton always tried to have breakfast with his daughter.
Both Hillary Clinton and Michelle Obama fit their duties as First Lady around their children, and both families asked for the press to respect their daughters' privacy - requests which were, on the whole, respected.
President Barack Obama and his daughters, Malia (left) and Sasha, watch on television in the Treaty Room of the White HouseImage copyrightWHITE HOUSE
Image caption
President Barack Obama has dinner with his daughters Malia (left) and Sasha (right) at the same time every night
The Obamas are also strict about putting time aside for the girls: family dinner takes place every night at 18:30. Mr Obama has said only a national emergency will stop him joining his family.
"The surprising truth is that being in the White House has made our family life more 'normal' than it's ever been," the President said in an interview with US magazine More earlier this year.
It is a response echoed by Chelsea about her own years.
She told the Huffington Post: "I was always deeply aware that I was living in history. But then I would have dinner with my parents at the kitchen table every night. There was so much about my life that also was normal."
Related Topics
Barack ObamaDonald TrumpHillary Clinton
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Trump elected

The people around Donald Trump
21 November 2016
Trump presidency: Your questions answered
14 November 2016
The hotel developer who became president
10 November 2016
Full coverage
18 November 2016
What will President Trump do first?
10 November 2016
Six ways the world could change
10 November 2016
Where Trump stands on key issues
9 November 2016
Five reasons Donald Trump won
9 November 2016
Full results
8 November 2016
As it happened: Trump in Obamacare U-turn
9 November 2016
US & Canada
Protesters in Washington
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
handout photo provided by the Chattanooga Fire Department (CFD) shows emergency responders at the scene of a school bus crash in Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA, 21 November 2016.
Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
22 November 2016
From the section US & Canada
Full article Six children dead in Tennessee bus crash
Jurgen Klinsmann
SPORT Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
21 November 2016
 From the section Football
Full article Klinsmann sacked as United States boss
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Former MI6 chief on Trump's 'worse scenario'
Former MI6 chief on Trump's 'worse scenario'
 Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
Donald Trump's 'big mistake' over Alec Baldwin sketch
 Hillary Clinton: 'I never wanted to leave the house again'
Hillary Clinton: 'I never wanted to leave the house again'
 Trump: The world's cartoonists react
Trump: The world's cartoonists react
 China traffic dance video goes viral
China traffic dance video goes viral
 JK Rowling at Fantastic Beasts premiere: 'It was an accident'
JK Rowling at Fantastic Beasts premiere: 'It was an accident'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 In pictures: Snow falls across England - with more forecast
BBC News
In pictures: Snow falls across England - with more forecast
 Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
BBC News
Princess Beatrice bikini photos 'breach of privacy'
 Judy Murray celebrates Andy and Jamie's triumphs on Twitter
BBC News
Judy Murray celebrates Andy and Jamie's triumphs on Twitter
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Why car designers stick with clay
BBC Autos
Why car designers stick with clay
 The greatest TV shows never made
BBC Culture
The greatest TV shows never made
 The 22 syllables that can get you killed
BBC Culture
The 22 syllables that can get you killed
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
47 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
7 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
5 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
3
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
7
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
8
What is the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
9
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
10
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 
From Around the Web
 Ranking the 25 Least Intelligent Presidents in U.S. History
Ranking the 25 Least Intelligent Presidents in U.S…
InsideGov | By Graphiq
How I Learned 9 Languages
How I Learned 9 Languages
Babbel
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the List?
The 33 Healthiest Dog Breeds -- Did Yours Make the…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Every Meryl Streep Movie, Ranked
Every Meryl Streep Movie, Ranked
PrettyFamous
Should You Adjust Your Stock Portfolio in the Wake of the Election?
Should You Adjust Your Stock Portfolio in the Wake of the…
Men's Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Savings? Free Review To Get You The Best Savings Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
