BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
selected
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Asia
selected
China
selected
India
Trump attacks China in Twitter outburst
5 December 2016
 From the section China 437 comments
Share

Media captionCarrie Gracie: How might China respond?
US President-elect Donald Trump has posted a series of tweets criticising China for its monetary policy and its operations in the South China Sea.
"Did China ask us if it was OK to devalue their currency" and "build a massive military complex?" he asked. "I don't think so!"
China said both sides should "stick to basic principles" of the relationship.
Last week Mr Trump risked a diplomatic rift with China by speaking directly with Taiwan's president.
The highly unusual move saw China lodge a complaint with the US.

Media captionWhere do Donald Trump supporters get their news from?
In response to the latest tweets, without directly referring to them, the Chinese foreign ministry said the US and China have long had "highly mutually beneficial" relations.
A spokesperson declined to comment on "he and his team's method and what's the thinking behind it", referring to Mr Trump.
Trump-Taiwan call: Why China lodged its protest
Carrie Gracie: Trump's Taiwan call will stun Beijing
What's behind the China-Taiwan divide?
Screencap of Tweet by Donald J. Trump saying: Image copyrightTWITTER / DONALD J. TRUMP
Screencap of Tweet by Donald J. Trump saying: Image copyrightTWITTER / DONALD J. TRUMP
The US has previously criticised China's yuan devaluation, saying it unfairly favours Chinese exporters.
It has also told Beijing to stop reclaiming land around islands and reefs which are claimed by multiple countries in the South China Sea, and has sent US Navy ships to the area. Both sides have accused each other of "militarising" the region.
Why is the South China Sea contentious?
Why China devalues the yuan
The US currently imposes tariffs on some Chinese imports, such as steel and tyres. Mr Trump has previously threatened to impose a 45% tariff on Chinese goods.
Can Donald Trump continue his Twitter diplomacy? - Jonathan Marcus, BBC Diplomatic Correspondent
Donald Trump's Twitter outburst along with his telephone call with the Taiwanese president has sent an emphatic signal to Beijing that the new US administration's Asia policy may not be business as usual.
We don't know if the tweets will continue when Mr Trump enters the White House. But if they do, they threaten not just to ruffle feathers abroad but also to sow uncertainty within his own administration.
The president may be the ultimate arbiter but once in office he cannot risk publicly second-guessing his key cabinet appointments. But there's another problem too. The tweet, as a medium, is by definition short and off-the-cuff.
Policymaking, by contrast, requires coolness, deliberation and a weighing up of options. The danger is that Twitter diplomacy, for all its honesty, could exacerbate crisis instead of resolving it.
Mr Trump's phone call with Taiwan's President Tsai Ing-wen was thought to be the first time a US leader or leader-in waiting has spoken to a Taiwanese leader since 1979, the year formal ties were severed.
The White House has said the phone call did not signal a shift in its decades-long "One China" policy stance, which does not recognise Taiwan as an independent sovereign state but also does not recognise Beijing's claim over Taiwan.
Vice President-elect Mike Pence has tried to downplay the call, saying it was a "tempest in a teapot" and "a moment of courtesy".
Beijing lodged a "solemn representation" with Washington, where it urged the US to "cautiously and properly handle" the issue of Taiwan, according to Chinese state media.
Beijing sees Taiwan as a province and aims to deny it any of the trappings of an independent state. It has threatened to use force if Taiwan formally declares independence.
View comments
Related Topics
Donald Trump
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Trump-Taiwan call: China lodges protest
3 December 2016
Trump's Taiwan phone call will stun Beijing
3 December 2016
Taiwan country profile
20 May 2016
What's behind the China-Taiwan divide?
3 December 2016
Why is the South China Sea contentious?
12 July 2016
China
Syrian government soldiers fire their weapons in eastern Aleppo, Syria. Photo: 5 December 2016
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 December 2016
 From the section Middle East
Full article Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
Xi Jinping and David Cameron
Chinese buy President Xi visit pub
5 December 2016
From the section Beds, Herts & Bucks
Full article Chinese buy President Xi visit pub
Hong Kong Exchange
Shenzhen-HK trading link starts up
5 December 2016
 From the section Business
Full article Shenzhen-HK trading link starts up
 
More Videos from the BBC
 London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
London has been plunged into darkness by a power cut
 The Indian village that has returned to bartering
The Indian village that has returned to bartering
 Gun-wielding student at Utah school disarmed by his mum
Gun-wielding student at Utah school disarmed by his mum
 Prepare for disappearing credit cards
Prepare for disappearing credit cards
 Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
Eight-year-old Wolverhampton boy delivers newborn sister
 China's hi-tech bike hire startups
China's hi-tech bike hire startups
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Card game ditches 'Trump' name as 'brand disaster'
BBC News
Card game ditches 'Trump' name as 'brand disaster'
 Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
BBC News
Muslim families sending children to Catholic schools
 The dad who asked for donations - even though he's well-off
BBC News
The dad who asked for donations - even though he's well-off
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
BBC Future
The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
 The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
BBC Future
The sex workers who sell access to their real lives
 11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
BBC Future
11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever Closer
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever…
Dassault Systemes
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Dassault Systemes
The Most Famous Celebrities With Famous Parents
The Most Famous Celebrities With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Making 100,000 Future Savers, Thanks to Citi
Making 100,000 Future Savers, Thanks to Citi
Citi Blog
Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
Presidents Ranked from First to Worst
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
Ranking U.S. Presidents by IQ Score
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
고음질 전용 블루투스리시버
SLASH-R, 고성능 DAC 사용. 하이파이에 스마트폰 무선 연결
interpark.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
