BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
Menu
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
selected
Health
 More sections
ADVERTISEMENT

Entertainment & Arts
Turner Prize: Helen Marten wins 2016 award
4 hours ago
 From the section Entertainment & Arts
Share
Helen MartenImage copyrightPA
Image caption
Helen Marten also won the Hepworth Prize last month
Helen Marten has won the Turner Prize, and has said she intends to share the £25,000 award with her fellow nominees.
The 31-year-old, the youngest of the shortlisted artists, was announced as the winner at Tate Britain in London.
The prestigious prize is awarded to a British artist, under the age of 50, considered to have put on the best exhibition of the past year.
It is the second major prize in the space of a month for Marten, who also won the inaugural Hepworth Prize.
The painter and sculptor announced in her speech as she won the Hepworth Prize on 17 November that she intended to share the £30,000 money with her four fellow nominees, because she believes "the hierarchical position of art prizes today is to a certain extent flawed".
She told the BBC she also planned to share the Turner Prize - but felt she could only make such a public proclamation once.
"This is something that can happen much more discreetly between the four of us," added Marten.
'Extraordinary range'
Accepting her prize from poet Ben Okri, Marten said she "wasn't expecting" to win and that she could not think of "a more brilliant and exciting shortlist of artists to be part of".
Marten, who is from Macclesfield but now lives in London, faced competition from Anthea Hamilton, Michael Dean and Josephine Pryde for the Turner Prize, the aim of which is to "promote public debate around new developments in contemporary art".
Marten was nominated for projects including Lunar Nibs at the 56th Venice Biennale and her solo exhibition Eucalyptus Let Us In at Greene Naftali in New York.
Speaking at the ceremony, she said: "Our global outlook is becoming ever more precarious and from the stripping of arts and creative writing programmes in schools syllabuses to the ever prominence of alt-right groups gaining a very visible and frightening political platform for a xenophobic, homophobic and racist outlook on the world.
"I think as artists today and as people in this environment, we are deeply, deeply privileged to be sitting here, with a community whose lifeblood is a sort of diversity and exuberance."
The runners-up each receive £5,000 prize money.
Liverpool's Turner Prize-winning streets - one year on
Turner Prize-winning homes 'must be affordable'
Will Gompertz's take on the exhibition
iWonder: Is the Turner Prize worth winning?
Helen Marten's workImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Helen Marten's work "creates poetic, pictorial puzzles", the Tate said
Addressing the ceremony, Sir Nicholas Serota, outgoing director of the Tate galleries, said: "The strength of the Turner Prize is that encourages us to think about the world in new ways.
"At a time when there are fears that we in the UK may be becoming more insular and more inward-looking as a nation, the Turner Prize reminds us that art opens us to new ideas.
"We need to encourage such openness in a society that faces many challenges."
He stressed arts and humanities need to play a central role in the UK education system and should not be "pushed to the margin", adding the arts were "part of our DNA as a nation".
Helen Marten with Night-blooming generaImage copyrightPA
Image caption
Marten's work Night-blooming genera forms part of the exhibition at Tate Britain
Marten's installations shown at the Tate as part of the Turner Prize exhibition, which runs until January, included works made from cotton buds, marbles, snooker chalk and bicycle chains.
The Tate said that "her collage-like gatherings of objects and images have a playful intent, creating poetic visual puzzles that seem to invite us into a game or riddle".
The jury said her work "is outstanding for its extraordinary range of materials and form" and that they admired its "poetic and enigmatic qualities which reflect the complexities and challenges of being in the world today".
They added that Marten is "making an exceptional contribution to the continuing development of contemporary visual art".
'World in flux'
The prize's jury was chaired by Alex Farquharson, director of Tate Britain.
He told the BBC Marten had been chosen as her work has "incredible virtuosity".
"She's like a kind of poet when it comes to using materials, images and found objects," said Farquharson. "The work is endlessly intriguing.
"It never settles at one meaning - it's very, very open-ended and has multiple narratives. It suggests a world in flux."
Helen MartenImage copyrightJOE HUMPHRYS
Image caption
The chair of the judges said Marten's work offers up a "game of meaning"
Farquharson said it had been a "very strong exhibition" but noted that Marten's work was "amazingly crafted", and showed "how visual images, not just words, can be made to signify, to mean things".
"It doesn't present you with an easy, simple, static view of itself," he added. "The work is like reading very rich, very enjoyable, very elusive, quite enigmatic poetry rather than a very clear report on what happened in a newspaper.
"I think the thing is to enjoy it for its visual qualities, its physical qualities, and get lost in the game of meaning and games of composition that it offers up."
Analysis by Will Gompertz, BBC arts editor
Helen Marten's workImage copyrightAP
For someone who says she would prefer her work to do the talking, Helen Marten is spending a lot of time in the limelight.
Last month she made national news as the winner of the inaugural Hepworth Prize for sculpture, to which she has now added one of the world's highest profile art accolades, the Turner Prize.
At 31 years old, she was the youngest artist on the shortlist - and, also, the most difficult to fathom in terms of her work.
Her hybrid sculptures, made out of materials both found and fabricated, form a complex tableau of ideas and associations. They are poetic puzzles that question meaning and assumption, and require an almost archaeological mind-set to solve.
She wants to jolt you, provoke you; throw you off balance.
Read more from Will
The other nominees were:
Anthea Hamilton's workImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Anthea Hamilton's work is amongst the most eye-catching in the Turner Prize exhibition
Anthea Hamilton, who lives and works in London, and was shortlisted for her Lichen! Libido! Chastity! exhibition at SculptureCenter, New York. The Tate said her sculpture, installation, performance and video bring "a surrealist sensibility to popular culture" and "seduce the viewer with comic and unexpected combinations of images, materials and words".
Josephine PrydeImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Pryde's work includes New Media Express (Baby Wants to Ride)
Josephine Pryde, whose work focuses on the meeting point between art and photography. Tate said it examined the idea of "art as commodity and of the seductive qualities of the wider art world", adding that she "calls into question the conventions of the gallery". The artist, from Alnwick, Northumberland, was nominated for her solo exhibition Lapses in Thinking by the Person I am at CCA Wattis in San Francisco.
Michael Dean's workImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Michael Dean uses "aesthetically overlooked materials"
Michael Dean, from Newcastle, who was nominated for sculptures and installations made from "aesthetically overlooked materials" like salvaged corrugated metal from a shop shutter. The Tate said his work, seen at South London Gallery and de Appel arts centre in Amsterdam, is "concerned with the physical presentation of language".
The ceremony was broadcast live on the BBC News Channel and BBC World and is now available online.
Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.
Related Topics
Art
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Video Turner Prize exhibition: Will Gompertz's essential rundown
26 September 2016
Liverpool's Turner Prize houses sold with 'anti-gentrification' clause
5 December 2016
Liverpool's Turner Prize-winning streets - one year on
5 December 2016
Hepworth Prize winner Helen Marten pledges to share £30,000 sculpture award
18 November 2016
Turner Prize 2016: Positive reviews for nominees
27 September 2016
Turner Prize exhibition opens with giant buttocks, brick suit and a train
26 September 2016
Related Internet links

What is the Turner Prize- - Tate
Art UK
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Entertainment & Arts
Jimmy Kimmel
Jimmy Kimmel to host 2017 Oscars
5 December 2016
From the section Entertainment & Arts
Full article Jimmy Kimmel to host 2017 Oscars
Morrissey
Music News round-up: Morrissey rates his audiences
5 December 2016
Full article Music News round-up: Morrissey rates his audiences
Alice Drummond and Robin Williams
Ghostbusters librarian actress dies
5 December 2016
From the section Entertainment & Arts
Full article Ghostbusters librarian actress dies
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 Brexit trigger could undermine devolution, Welsh Government claims
Brexit trigger could undermine devolution, Welsh Government claims
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
 Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Organ donation campaigner Kirstie Tancock dies
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
BBC News
Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
 The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
BBC News
The sun sets for the last time over Barrow, Alaska
 John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
BBC News
John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 Ten films to watch in December
BBC Culture
Ten films to watch in December
 A museum of 500,000 oddities
BBC Travel
A museum of 500,000 oddities
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever Closer
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever…
Dassault Systemes
Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Every Meryl Streep Movie From Worst the Best
Every Meryl Streep Movie From Worst the Best
PrettyFamous
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make the List?
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
The 25 Least Popular Dogs to Own
The 25 Least Popular Dogs to Own
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

Sport
Weather
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
