BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
BBC Sport
 FOOTBALL
All Sport
Home
Football
Formula 1
Cricket
Rugby U
Tennis
Golf
Athletics
Cycling
Open All Sport menu
European Football
Results
Fixtures
Tables
Champions League
Europa League
Live Scores
All Teams
Leagues & Cups
Uefa team of the year: Joe Allen, Aaron Ramsey and Gareth Bale make shortlist

8 hours ago From the section European Football  73
Share this page
 Wales' Joe Allen
Stoke midfielder Joe Allen was named in the Euro 2016 team of the tournament for helping Wales reach the semi-finals
Wales players Joe Allen, Aaron Ramsey and Gareth Bale have made the 40-man shortlist for Uefa's team of the year.

Allen and Ramsey are among 12 Premier League players on the shortlist.

Leicester City's Riyad Mahrez and ex-team-mate N'Golo Kante both feature after the club's Premier League win.

The other Premier League players included are Toby Alderweireld, Laurent Koscielny, Paul Pogba, Kevin de Bruyne, Dimitri Payet, Sergio Aguero, Alexis Sanchez and Zlatan Ibrahimovic.

Champions League winners Real Madrid are the most represented club with goalkeeper Keylor Navas, defenders Sergio Ramos, Dani Carvajal and Pepe, midfielders Luka Modric and Toni Kroos, and forwards Bale and Cristiano Ronaldo included.

Barcelona have five players on the list in Lionel Messi, Luis Suarez, Neymar, Andres Iniesta and Gerard Pique.

In total there are four goalkeepers, 12 defenders, 12 midfielders and 12 forwards.

Fans can vote for the team of the year on Uefa's website until 3 January.

The 40-man shortlist (in alphabetical order by position):

Goalkeepers: Gianluigi Buffon (Juventus), Keylor Navas (Real Madrid), Jan Oblak (Atletico Madrid) Rui Patricio (Sporting Lisbon).

Defenders: Toby Alderweireld (Tottenham Hostspur) Jerome Boateng (Bayern Munich), Leonardo Bonnuci (Juventus), Dani Carvajal (Real Madrid), Diego Godin (Atletico Madrid), Raphael Guerreiro (Borussia Dortmund), Juanfran (Atletico Madrid), Joshua Kimmich (Bayern Munich), Laurent Koscielny (Arsenal), Pepe (Real Madrid), Gerard Pique (Barcelona), Sergio Ramos (Real Madrid).

Midfielders: Joe Allen (Stoke), Kevin De Bruyne (Man City), Yannick Carrasco (Atletico Madrid), Andres Iniesta (Barcelona), N'Golo Kante (Chelsea), Toni Kroos (Real Madrid), Grzegorz Krychowiak (PSG), Riyad Mahrez (Leicester), Luka Modric (Real Madrid), Dimitri Payet (West Ham), Paul Pogba (Man Utd), Aaron Ramsey (Arsenal).

Forwards: Sergio Aguero (Man City), Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (Borussia Dortmund), Gareth Bale (Real Madrid), Antoine Griezmann (Atletico Madrid), Gonzalo Higuain (Juventus), Zlatan Ibrahimovic (Man Utd), Robert Lewandowski (Bayern Munich), Lionel Messi (Barcelona), Neymar (Barcelona), Cristiano Ronaldo (Real Madrid), Alexis Sanchez (Arsenal), Luis Suarez (Barcelona).
 View Comments 73
Share this page
Find out more

Match of the Day Facebook

Read more on Match of the Day Facebook
Match of the Day Twitter

Read more on Match of the Day Twitter
BBC Sport Facebook

Read more on BBC Sport Facebook
BBC Sport Twitter

Read more on BBC Sport Twitter
Uefa

Read more on Uefa
Uefa Champions League

Read more on Uefa Champions League
Uefa Europa League

Read more on Uefa Europa League
Top Stories

Gareth Southgate
Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington

3h From the section Football
Read more on Interviewing Southgate no insult, says Bevington
West Brom players celebrate
West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley

4h From the section Football
Read more on West Brom's first-half blitz sweeps aside Burnley
England cricket team
England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew

15h From the section Cricket
Read more on England must prove they have mindset to beat India - Agnew
 
 
From Around the Web
 These Congress Members Are Insanely Rich
These Congress Members Are Insanely Rich
InsideGov | Graphiq
Here Are the 25 Presidents with the Lowest IQ Scores
Here Are the 25 Presidents with the Lowest IQ Scores
InsideGov | By Graphiq
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Child Anymore
25 Names Nobody Wants to Name Their Child Anymore
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Check Out Rory McIlroy's 436-Yard Drive!
Muscle & Fitness
How to Flirt With a Woman You Just Met
How to Flirt With a Woman You Just Met
Men's Fitness
Japan to offer 1-year path to permanent residency
Japan to offer 1-year path to permanent residency
Nikkei Asian Review
Promoted content by Outbrain
BBC Sport features
Football alerts, newsletters and social media
Get latest scores and headlines sent straight to your phone, sign-up to our newsletter and learn where to find us on online.
Gossip column logo
Today's football gossip
The latest rumours and stories from around the world of football.
5 live's football daily podcast
Commentaries, clips and podcasts
Enjoy the best debate, analysis and interviews with 5 live and World Service football plus our commentary listings.
Women playing football
How to get into Football
How to get into football - the most popular sport in the world, with clubs and facilities throughout the UK.
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
News Feeds
Help & FAQs
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
