BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
selected
Australia
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
US & Canada
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
9 hours ago
 From the section Africa
Share
The fake embassy and the real embassyImage copyrightUS STATE DEPARTMENT
Image caption
To the left is the fake embassy and to the right is the real one, in very different neighbourhoods of Accra
News has travelled the world that an organised gang based in Ghana ran a fake embassy selling real US visas for $6,000 (£4,700) for "about a decade". How did they get away with it for so long?
The US State Department says Ghanaian and Turkish organised crime rings were running the fake embassy complete with a US flag and a portrait of President Barack Obama "unhindered... for about a decade".
The faded building couldn't have looked more different to the real embassy.
But, as journalist Sammy Darko in Accra explained on Focus on Africa, the customers have most probably never been to an embassy before so didn't know what to expect.
"They also find white people there and they assume that it is the US embassy," he added.
A painting being painted of re-elected US President Barack Obama 7, 2012.Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The fake embassy reportedly had a painting of the US president hanging up on the wall
The State Department's description of the operation gave more insight into how people were deceived.
"The fake embassy did not accept walk-in visa appointments; instead, they drove to the most remote parts of West Africa to find customers. They would shuttle the customers to Accra, and rent them a room at a hotel nearby. The Ghanaian organized crime ring would shuttle the victims to and from the fake embassies."
The State Department also said the criminals running the operation were able to pay off corrupt officials "to look the other way".
Grey line
Have there been any arrests?
Several. That's as much as we know.
The State Department is vague about this, simply saying "when the task force conducted raids, they arrested several suspects".
They said that back on 2 November, and added that "several suspects remain at large".
They added that Ghanaian police have warrants for their arrest and plan to pursue them.
They also said an investigation and search for the Turkish organised crime group was "ongoing".
The BBC understands, over a month later, that this investigation is still continuing.
It appears to have been a big operation, as the State Department says the sham embassy advertised its services across Ghana, Ivory Coast and Togo.
At the raid, officials found 150 passports from 10 countries.
Grey line
Why are we talking about this now?
According to the time stamp, the State Department published the news of the arrests on 2 November.
The BBC's Thomas Naadi in Ghana's capital, Accra, says the arrests took place a few months earlier than this, in June.
The State Department said an informant tipped off investigators about both the fake US embassy and a fake Dutch embassy at the same time, although it isn't clear when this was.
It is a bit of a mystery why it was not picked up by media until 2 December. But when it was, it was widely shared on social media.
CNN, al Jazeera and Washington Post
Image caption
Six months after the court case the mainsteam media picked up the story
Three days later, and the media is getting more creative with their headlines.
The Washington Post has gone with "Mobsters ran a fake US embassy in Ghana for 10 years, flying the flag and issuing visas for $6,000".
Grey line
Were the visas genuine?
The State Department said the embassy provided some customers "fraudulently obtained, legitimate US visas" as well as counterfeit visas, false identification documents (including bank records, education records, birth certificates, and others).
It says the operation paid corrupt officials to obtain legitimate blank documents to be doctored.
Visa
Image caption
This genuine visa shows what the legitimate documents look like
Grey line
Did the customers care if the embassy was fake?
We don't know for sure whether the customers knew if the embassy was fake.
But if they did, they had strong motivations to proceed regardless.
Travelling to the US is a big thing for many Ghanaians who are desperate to reach the US as they are convinced it is an opportunity for them to better their lives, explains the BBC's Adelaide Arthur.
Also, being refused a visa can be very disheartening for prospective travellers and this often makes them vulnerable to scammers who promise them a visa, she adds.
Grey line
How many people used this service?
The State Department has not commented on this.
We also don't know what kind of visas people were buying.
We may never know how many people are living in the US with visas issued from the fake embassy.
It is not clear if the US authorities will try and take any action against them.
Grey line
How does it compare to the official procedure?
The official application has many stages.
When the BBC's Adelaide Arthur, who is Ghanaian, went through the procedure herself, the first stage was to pay a visa fee at the bank.
After paying the fee, she was given a code which would allow her to submit a form which she filled in on the US embassy's website. The type of form you fill in depends on your purpose of visit. Her visit was for media, so she applied for a visa Class I. But people applying to visit the US usually choose visa B1/B2.
After filling in the form, she uploaded a passport-sized photograph which had to conform to specific dimensions. She was then allowed to set her interview appointment date which was within two weeks of submitting her application form online.
On the interview day, she arrived at the visa section of the embassy in the upmarket suburb of Cantonments in Accra.
"The imposing building that houses the US embassy is hard to miss when travelling around that area, where a number of missions are also located, including the South African, Italian and South Korean embassies," she said.
She attended the interview with her application submission confirmation, appointment confirmation, passport, visa fee receipt, as well as other supporting documents, including proof of employment and financial support.
Her fingerprints were taken before her interview with a consular officer.
FingerprintImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
In the genuine US visa application procedure you give your fingerprint
Usually, the applicant is made aware of the decision after the interview with a consular officer.
In her first attempt, she was refused the visa immediately after the interview and was given back her documents.
Two subsequent applications were however, successful and she was told to come back two days later for her visa.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Around the BBC

Africa Today podcasts
Related Internet links

US State Department announcement
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Africa
Traffic in Nairobi
African nations ban Europe 'dirty fuel'
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article African nations ban Europe 'dirty fuel'
Ousainou Darboe had been due to stand in last Thursday's presidential election
Gambia opposition leader freed on bail
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Gambia opposition leader freed on bail
Nigeria's former military ruler President Mohammadu Buhari (3rd L) poses for a group picture with Nigeria's Senior military officer (from L) : Chief of Naval Staff Ibok Ekwe Ibas, Chief of Defence Staff General Abayomi Olonisakin, Minister of Defence Mansur Dan Ali, Chief of Army Staff Lt-General Tukur Buratai, and Chief of Air Staff Air Marshall Sadique Abubakar, during the Army Day celebration in Dansadau, northwest Nigerian Zamfara State, on July 13, 2016.
Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
5 December 2016
Full article Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
 Car filmed going in wrong direction on A14 near Ipswich
Car filmed going in wrong direction on A14 near Ipswich
 English-speaking Cameroonians protest against French
English-speaking Cameroonians protest against French
 Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
Ex-footballer: 'Always two or three in the bed'
 The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
The Scottish village left £400,000 by former PoW
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Barnsley man jailed for raping young girl
BBC News
Barnsley man jailed for raping young girl
 Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
BBC News
Millionaire was 'blackmailed by escort girlfriend'
 Amazon unveils plans for grocery shop with no checkouts
BBC News
Amazon unveils plans for grocery shop with no checkouts
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Look closer: What a background can reveal
BBC Culture
Look closer: What a background can reveal
 The Rolls-Royce 'high-sided vehicle' comes into focus
BBC Autos
The Rolls-Royce 'high-sided vehicle' comes into focus
 Using school buses to democratise wi-fi
BBC Autos
Using school buses to democratise wi-fi
Africa live reporting
LIVE Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
9 hours ago
Scroll down for Monday's stories
Full article Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Isn’t it exciting to have a perfect home?
Dassault Systemes
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
Ranking Every Clint Eastwood Movie from Worst to First
Ranking Every Clint Eastwood Movie from Worst to First
PrettyFamous
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Ginger: Superfood for Super Training
Ginger: Superfood for Super Training
Muscle & Fitness
These Are the Highest Paid CEOs Under 40
These Are the Highest Paid CEOs Under 40
FindTheCompany
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
