BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
selected
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
World
selected
Africa
selected
Australia
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
US & Canada
HIV vaccine: Clinical trial begins in South Africa
30 November 2016
 From the section Africa
Share
Nurse takes a blood sample on March 8, 2011 in a mobile clinic set up to test students for HIV at Madwaleni high school near Mtubatuba in Kwazulu Natal, South Africa.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
South Africa is battling to curb the spread of HIV/Aids
A new vaccine against HIV, the virus that causes Aids, is being tested in South Africa in what scientists say is the first large study of an HIV vaccine's effectiveness since 2009.
The study aims to enrol 5,400 sexually active young men and women.
About seven million people in South Africa are living with the virus, which is one reason why the trial is taking place there.
Experts hope the vaccine will be "the final nail in the coffin" for HIV.
The vaccine regime being tested is based on one used in a trial in Thailand in 2009, which had a protection rate of about 30%. Results from South Africa are expected in four years.
Africa Live: More on this and news updates
Zambia MP: I was excommunicated for saying I had HIV
Since the HIV virus was identified in 1983, efforts to develop an effective vaccine have proved unsuccessful.
Researchers hope that this might come to an end with the current study, which is code-named HVTN 702.
It is being led by South Africa's Glenda Gray, a university research professor and head of South Africa's Medical Research Council.
"It will tell us whether the initial success observed [at a smaller scale] will bear fruit in the form of a safe and effective HIV vaccine designed for the people of southern Africa," Dr Gray said.
People sit in the waiting room in an anti-retroviral clinic in Emmaus hospital in Winterton, in South Africa's Kwazulu-Natal region on March 11, 2008.Image copyrightAFP
Image caption
Aids remains the biggest cause of death among young people in Africa
According to the United Nations, more than 30 million people have died from Aids since the 1980s.
Recent breakthroughs in anti-retroviral treatments have improved the lifespan of Aids patients.
However, the only effective prevention remains abstinence or the use of barrier methods such as condoms during sexual intercourse.
'Making history'
As part of the present trial, study participants will receive a total of five injections over one year, says the US National Institutes of Health (NIH), which is sponsoring the trial.
Awethu Benenengu, a 20-year-old construction worker, who is one of the participants in the trial, told the BBC's Nomsa Maseko in Johannesburg that he volunteered because he wanted to help defeat Aids.
"I decided to get involved because I don't like the way my HIV-positive cousin is treated," Mr Benenengu said.
"There is so much stigma. I want to be part of a generation that changes this and I want my children to be proud one day of their father for getting involved in making history."
Participants who become infected with HIV during the trial will be referred to local medical providers for care and treatment, NIH adds.
They will be advised on how to reduce their risk of transmitting the virus.
Related Topics
South Africa
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Zambia's HIV 'warrior' MP
30 November 2016
Video The South African village blighted by Aids
20 July 2016
Are young S Africans ignoring message?
18 July 2016
Video The battle to beat HIV in South Africa
2 July 2015
Fighting the curse of the blessers
21 May 2016
Around the BBC

Africa Today podcast
Related Internet links

National Department of Health
Unicef
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites
Africa
map
Tribal clashes in DR Congo leave 31 dead
6 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Tribal clashes in DR Congo leave 31 dead
Traffic in Nairobi
African nations ban Europe 'dirty fuel'
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article African nations ban Europe 'dirty fuel'
Ousainou Darboe had been due to stand in last Thursday's presidential election
Gambia opposition leader freed on bail
5 December 2016
 From the section Africa
Full article Gambia opposition leader freed on bail
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Siberian man tracks down great-grandfather's executioners
Siberian man tracks down great-grandfather's executioners
 Cumbria flooding: One year on from Storm Desmond devastation
Cumbria flooding: One year on from Storm Desmond devastation
 Gambia election: President Yahya Jammeh 'will never pardon' opposition
Gambia election: President Yahya Jammeh 'will never pardon…
 Terminally ill Devon baby 'may die before car funding'
Terminally ill Devon baby 'may die before car funding'
 Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
Footage of a speeding car flipping over is released by police
 'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
'Sextortion': NCA releases awareness video
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Keo Woolford: Hawaii Five-0 actor dies aged 49
BBC News
Keo Woolford: Hawaii Five-0 actor dies aged 49
 Fiat heir Lapo Elkann 'faked own kidnapping' in New York
BBC News
Fiat heir Lapo Elkann 'faked own kidnapping' in New York
 Saturn mission approaches tour finale
BBC News
Saturn mission approaches tour finale
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 What it’s like to sail a giant ship on Earth’s busiest seas
BBC Future
What it’s like to sail a giant ship on Earth’s busiest seas
 Artificial intelligence could one day make us feel awkward
BBC Future
Artificial intelligence could one day make us feel awkward
 11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
BBC Future
11 world-changing ideas that fit on a postcard
Africa live reporting
LIVE Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
9 hours ago
Scroll down for Monday's stories
Full article Africa Live: Russian warplanes for Nigeria, popular South African gospel singer dies
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Over 1 million people use this language learning app
Over 1 million people use this language learning…
Babbel
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
The US Presidents Ranked from Richest to Poorest
InsideGov | By Graphiq
The Most Common Long Baby Names
The Most Common Long Baby Names
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
The Celebrity Couples That Ruled Hollywood
The Celebrity Couples That Ruled Hollywood
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever Closer
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever…
Dassault Systemes
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Are Our Oceans the Answer to a Population Crisis?
Dassault Systemes
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
