BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Magazine
Viewpoint: 'Why every woman should be offered menstrual leave'
3 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Share
Churan ZhengImage copyrightCHURAN ZHENG
100 Women

Video Why I call myself pansexual
Video How trees helped an infertile woman heal
Video Tackling the root of a Stem deficit
Video The new world of hipster and heavy metal hijabis
Several provinces in China now have laws in place to ensure women can take a day or two a month off work if they suffer from period pain. Events organiser Churan Zheng regularly takes menstrual leave, and says it is an essential option for every woman.
I suffer from severe period pain and every month post a picture on my social media accounts showing a woman tied to an invisible cross with arrows stuck into her stomach. It always get a lot of "likes" because it vividly visualises what many women suffer during their period.
I always get a heavy feeling and stomach cramps the night before my period starts. And when I wake up, the pain that accompanies the menstruation is so unbearable that I always imagine myself grabbing my intestines and tearing them out of my body, or cutting them out with a pair of scissors. I feel like vomiting.
Ever since I left university and started work I have taken painkillers almost every month but the drugs make me feel tired and sleepy. I need hot water bottles as well in order to battle the pain.
It's often difficult during these times for me to concentrate on my work, which makes me curse my gender.
Menstrual pain cartoonImage copyrightCHURAN ZHENG
Image caption
Churan posts a picture every month on social media representing her period pain
Fortunately my company - Pride Planning, which works on female rights campaigns - offers female staff one paid day's leave every month. Employees do not need to get doctors' notes, or worry about their salary being deducted for dropping a day's work. In my case, as long as there is no business trip scheduled or important work to be finished, I normally take half a day or a day off. I just stay at home, sleeping after taking painkillers or doing some work in bed.
Some people think allowing women to take menstrual leave costs the business money, so there is a debate about whether it could discourage companies from hiring women. However, so far as I know, my company - where female employees are in the majority - doesn't suffer significant financial loss despite the fact that almost every woman takes menstrual leave every month, or every other month.
line break
What is period pain?
woman with stomach painImage copyrightISTOCK
Most women experience pain as part of their menstrual monthly cycle.
It is usually experienced as abdominal cramps, which can spread to the back and thighs.
Period pain can be felt as a dull ache or painful spasms. Women can also experience nausea, diarrhoea and headaches.
The scientific term for period pain is dysmenorrhoea. Levels of the hormone prostaglandin, produced by cells in the lining of the womb, cause it to contract.
The higher that level, the more strongly and more often the womb contracts, causing the pain.
Some women can also experience pelvic pain, even when not on their period.
line break
We tend to plan ahead before we take the leave, or try to catch up as soon as we can afterwards. Male colleagues don't seem to feel unfairly treated. In fact if anything our work environment has become more positive and friendly since the policy was introduced.
Other people might think that such policies are too protective of women and that they could result in female employees being seen as weak or lazy.
However, so far as I know, women who don't experience period pain normally don't take this kind of leave. Apart from anything else those who work for corporations that have a very competitive work culture do not want to be seen as "feeble" or "fussy". And as I say, in my company, people who do take the leave have to catch up with their work as soon as they get back, which brings added pressure.
Churan ZhengImage copyrightREUTERS
Image caption
Churan was one of five feminists who were detained last year ahead of a planned protest against sexual harassment
It's strange that even today the idea of a day's paid leave for women can cause such heated debate and criticism. Profit and efficiency are worshipped above everything else.
Nature cannot free women from period pain, but isn't there something our society can do for women? I cannot stop thinking that if men had periods then menstrual leave might have been written into national constitutions from the very beginning.
line
100 women BBC season logo
What is 100 women?
BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre.
Other stories you might like:
'I married a man to keep my girlfriend'
'Adults are so obsessed with children they have no time for important things'
Who is on the BBC's 100 Women 2016 list?
Translation by Natalia Zuo
Related Topics
Women's rightsWomen's health
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
100 Women

Video Why I call myself pansexual
6 December 2016
Video How trees helped an infertile woman heal
6 December 2016
Video Tackling the root of a Stem deficit
6 December 2016
Video The new world of hipster and heavy metal hijabis
5 December 2016
Video Indian women walk streets after midnight
5 December 2016
Video Meet the Lebanese women fighting street harassment
5 December 2016
100 Women 2016: Fighting for a good death
1 December 2016
Video Meet Arizona’s old-age cheerleaders
1 December 2016
Video Rachida Dati: "It's not politically correct but it's true"
1 December 2016
How I cope with my job treating rapists
30 November 2016
'I decided to design clothes that fit people with Down's syndrome'
29 November 2016
Video Scar: Life after self-harm
29 November 2016
Bringing my son up as a feminist
28 November 2016
Video 100 Women 2016: Why wear a hijab?
28 November 2016
Video Does twerking objectify or empower?
28 November 2016
Video Alicia Keys on make-up, sexism and Trump
28 November 2016
100 Women 2016: My sham marriage
27 November 2016
Viewpoint: Changing the world is more important than changing nappies
26 November 2016
BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
21 November 2016
BBC 100 Women's Mexico festival draws thousands
25 November 2016
Video 100 Women 2016: Defying her family in Pakistan
24 November 2016
Video The accountant turned nurse in Aleppo
22 November 2016
Image gallery The Central American women trying to make it north
25 November 2016
Video The pop star turned democracy icon
25 November 2016
100 Women 2016: The cancer blog gripping Japan
23 November 2016
The girl who learned in the cloud
22 November 2016
Video Children rewrite 'sexist' Cinderella
22 November 2016
Video The true story behind the iconic photo
22 November 2016
Video Winnie Harlow: 'My skin doesn't define me'
21 November 2016
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
21 November 2016
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
21 November 2016
Video Facing down the far right in Sweden
23 November 2016
Video 2016: A year of women's protests
21 November 2016
Magazine
Luther Windley
Descendants of slaves fight for their land
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Descendants of slaves fight for their land
Manila at night
Video
Video
Manila's brutal nightshift
4 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Manila's brutal nightshift
Hands typing on keyboard
The city getting rich from fake news
5 December 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article The city getting rich from fake news
 
More Videos from the BBC
 'I paid nearly £3,000 for a £300 washing machine'
'I paid nearly £3,000 for a £300 washing machine'
 100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
 'Weakness is a choice' - disabled bodybuilder in South Africa
'Weakness is a choice' - disabled bodybuilder in South Africa
 100 Women: The myth of the female orgasm
100 Women: The myth of the female orgasm
 Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
Photographer Luo Yang captures China's new generation of 'Girls'
 'What planet are you living on?'
'What planet are you living on?'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
BBC News
Man who urinated in work colleagues' water bottles is sentenced
 Chapecoense plane crash: Brazil team and crew filmed before take-off
BBC News
Chapecoense plane crash: Brazil team and crew filmed before take-off
 Nie Shubin: China clears man 21 years after execution
BBC News
Nie Shubin: China clears man 21 years after execution
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 Artificial intelligence could one day make us feel awkward
BBC Future
Artificial intelligence could one day make us feel awkward
 Why we should send politicians to space
BBC Future
Why we should send politicians to space
 The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
BBC Future
The next big leap in space travel will use hypersonic planes
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
4 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever Closer
The Virtual Reality of Retail – Bringing Consumers Ever…
Dassault Systemes
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
MLB's Least Valuable Players of 2016
PointAfter | By Graphiq
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make the List?
These Are the Nicest Dog Breeds: Did Yours Make…
PetBreeds | By Graphiq
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Greatest Romantic Comedies Ever
The Greatest Romantic Comedies Ever
PrettyFamous
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k-£1m Or £500+ Regular Savings? Review Your Interest Rates Today!
expatsavingsreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
UK Expat In South Korea?
£70k+ In UK Pensions? Download A Free Expat Guide & Expert Advice!
your.expatpensionreview.com
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
