BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
selected
Entertainment & Arts
Health
 More sections
Magazine
100 Women 2016: Are difficult friendships better?
21 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Share
Paula HawkinsImage copyrightKATE NEIL
100 Women

BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
100 Women 2016: What to look forward to
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
Video Winnie Harlow: 'My skin doesn't define me'
Paula Hawkins, author of best-selling thriller The Girl on the Train, says friendships between women are not always straightforward but often the most interesting.
My best friend and I broke up - a couple of times, actually - in our late 20s. We fought, stopped talking to each other, missed each other, got back together, moved on.
We did not argue over men - nothing so trivial. Our disagreements were about the important stuff: politics, family, motherhood, the choices we'd made. The mistakes we'd made.
line
100 women BBC season logo
What is 100 women?
BBC 100 Women names 100 influential and inspirational women around the world every year. We create documentaries, features and interviews about their lives, giving more space for stories that put women at the centre.
We want YOU to get involved with your comments, views and ideas. You can find us on: Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest, Snapchat, and YouTube.
Spread the word by sharing your favourite posts and your own stories using #100women
We split up, but we got back together. We supported each other, stood up for one another, fought each other's corner. We offered shoulders to cry on, we were each other's cheerleader. It was complicated. It still is, sometimes.
Ah, the complicated female friendship. This is how the narrative goes: men are friendly in straightforward, uncomplicated ways, but women are different. Their relationships with each other are fraught with contradictions and competitive urges, dogged by petty jealousies and insecurity. Complex.
Rebecca Ferguson appears in a scene from the film The Girl on the TrainImage copyrightAP
Image caption
The protagonists of the Girl on the Train often compete with and misunderstand each other
Of course there is no such animal as a "female friendship" any more than there is a male one; friendships are as diverse and varied as people are. The troubled relationship I had with my best friend in my 20s is by no means representative of all my friendships. Some are sunnier, they've been smoother sailing - even if I sometimes wonder if that is because the waters are shallower.
Another unsatisfactory thing about that narrative is the idea that the simple friendship is necessarily better - healthier - than the complicated one. Why does simplicity trump complexity? Isn't it possible that with complexity comes a depth of feeling, an emotional intensity that simplicity lacks? And might it not be the case that these friendships occasionally press on our bruises, causing hurt sometimes, but also forcing us to know ourselves better in the process?
Women in their 20s and 30s are confronted by hard choices. The question of whether to have children is necessarily more urgent for a woman. The question of whether or how best to combine parenthood with a career is something that rarely troubles men.
And it is in the context of those hard choices that divisions arise. It is almost impossible not to be made to feel sensitive, even defensive, about those choices when they are scrutinised and picked apart by family, friends, the media, society at large.
When women do disagree about important, life-changing, life-defining decisions, their differences of opinion are characterised in a very specific way. They are cast as catfights or Mommy Wars - bitchy, vicious, claws-out, hair-pulling affairs, a far cry from the sober disagreements in which men (occasionally) find themselves embroiled.
Paula HawkinsImage copyrightKATE NEIL
Image caption
Hawkins says friendships get easier as time goes on
What struck me when writing the female characters in The Girl on the Train was how easily women under strain might internalise misogynist sentiment, how simple it might become, when threatened, to throw around the epithets of "bunny boiler" or "home-wrecker" or "whore".
It is hard for young women to negotiate the spaces around motherhood, career and relationships and in the novel they do it with varying degrees of success (or more accurately, varying degrees of failure).
There are few truly good things about getting older, but here, in my opinion, are two. First, no-one bothers to catcall you in the street any longer. And second, friendship gets easier.
That relentless scrutiny of our choices lessens and we are left to have the friendships we ought to have. They might not be simple, but why should they be? Why shouldn't friendship be just as deep and complex and enriching as a love affair?
Join the conversation - find us on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and Twitter.
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
100 Women

BBC 100 Women 2016: Who is on the list?
21 November 2016
100 Women 2016: What to look forward to
21 November 2016
Girl gamers challenge e-sports sexism
21 November 2016
Video Winnie Harlow: 'My skin doesn't define me'
21 November 2016
Magazine
Mandy Littlewood
My kidneys have failed, and I know my kids face the same fate
21 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article My kidneys have failed, and I know my kids face the same fate
Memunatu Turay outside her home in Freetown
My quarrel with a proud FGM cutter
20 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article My quarrel with a proud FGM cutter
Seoul - checking toilet for hidden camera
Does Korea have a problem with hidden cameras?
20 November 2016
 From the section Magazine
Full article Does Korea have a problem with hidden cameras?
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Meghan Markle: Meet Prince Harry's girlfriend
Meghan Markle: Meet Prince Harry's girlfriend
 Drugs warning: Family's agony after 'ecstasy death'
Drugs warning: Family's agony after 'ecstasy death'
 Trump: The world's cartoonists react
Trump: The world's cartoonists react
 100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
100 Women 2016: Model Winnie Harlow on confidence and defiance
 Swapping the hills of Hollywood for those of Edinburgh
Swapping the hills of Hollywood for those of Edinburgh
 Noisy Oxford Brookes student concern 'extremely serious'
Noisy Oxford Brookes student concern 'extremely serious'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 Did the Queen stop Princess Margaret marrying Peter Townsend?
BBC News
Did the Queen stop Princess Margaret marrying Peter Townsend?
 Trump election: Mitt Romney considered for secretary of state
BBC News
Trump election: Mitt Romney considered for secretary of state
 Vanessa Marcotte murder: Police search for 'dark-coloured SUV'
BBC News
Vanessa Marcotte murder: Police search for 'dark-coloured SUV'
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 We’ve got human intelligence all wrong
BBC Future
We’ve got human intelligence all wrong
 This is the electric Jaguar
BBC Autos
This is the electric Jaguar
 The Los Angeles auto show in 90 seconds
BBC Autos
The Los Angeles auto show in 90 seconds
Top Stories
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
President-elect Donald Trump says the US will quit the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal on his first day in office.
51 minutes ago
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
11 minutes ago
How 'thunderstorm asthma' stopped a city
9 minutes ago
Features & Analysis

Arvind Kejriwal, bbc hindi, nitin srivastava
War of words
When Delhi's chief minister lost his cool with the BBC
 David Leyonhjelm was once branded the 
Blunt approach
The unapologetic world of Australia's 'nastiest' MP
 James Bevan besides ammunition box
Arming the enemy
How do IS get hold of weapons from the West?
 An Indonesian baby girl (C) lying on a bed as doctors prepare to perform her circumcision in Bandung. Indonesia,
Quiet tradition
The Singaporean girls who undergo genital cutting
 Divided Thanksgiving
Tantrums over the turkey
Will this be the most awkward Thanksgiving ever?
 A singer raises his fist in the music video for the Kashmir Anthem Song
Ballad blues
Kashmir 'freedom anthem' released to controversy
 Cafe in Oberhausen
Refugee cafe
The Syrians who started a restaurant in Germany
 US President-elect Donald Trump arriving with his son Barron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton
Moving tale
Does Melania's White House 'snub' matter?
 A car bomb explodes next to Iraqi special forces vehicles as they advance towards Islamic State-held territory in Mosul, Iraq (16 November 2016)
Farewell 'SpongeBob'
One Iraqi soldier's journey through the madness of war
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
US to quit TPP trade deal, says Trump
2
Is Melania's White House snub unusual?
3
Earthquake triggers Japan tsunami
4
Kanye cancels tour after stage rant
5
Reaction: Donald Trump to dump TPP
6
S Africa 'pesticide pastor' condemned
7
Africa highlights: Mugabe being 'bewitched', Japanese troops land in South Sudan
8
Germany's 'Sharia police' acquitted
9
Is it all over for Turkey and the EU?
10
'Warrior Monk' tipped to head Pentagon
 
From Around the Web
 1940 to Today: The Most Popular Names of Every Decade
1940 to Today: The Most Popular Names of Every…
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
26 Signs a Girl Likes You
26 Signs a Girl Likes You
Men's Fitness
The Most Popular "A" Names for Boys and Girls
The Most Popular "A" Names for Boys and Girls
MooseRoots | By Graphiq
7 Ways to Get Her to Like You
7 Ways to Get Her to Like You
Men's Fitness
15 People Who Might Actually Be in Relationships with Their Quest Bars
15 People Who Might Actually Be in Relationships…
Muscle & Fitness
7 Tips for Flirting in the Gym
7 Tips for Flirting in the Gym
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
