
BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
Zika: The key unanswered questions
By James Gallagher
Health editor, BBC News website
5 February 2016
 From the section Health Related TopicsZika virus outbreak
Share
Zika virusImage copyrightSPL
Zika virus

Zika outbreak: What you need to know
Zika outbreak: Travel advice
Mothers' fears amid Zika outbreak
Video How mums-to-be are tackling Zika
This grainy image is one of the few pictures of the Zika virus.
The infection has prompted the World Health Organization to declared a global health emergency due to the link to thousands of suspected cases of babies born with small brains - or microcephaly - in Brazil.
But there are still many, crucial, unanswered questions.
How many people have been infected in the Americas?
The best estimate of Zika infections is between 500,000 and 1.5 million - which is quite a wide margin of error. What percentage of people in an affected area are getting infected? Is it everyone? We don't know.
Why the explosive outbreak?
One theory is that the virus has mutated to become more infectious. Alternatively, some experts argue it could simply be a case of the virus reaching areas where people are densely packed together and there are huge numbers of mosquitoes.
Who is infectious?
Around 80% of people have no symptoms when they get the virus - although this figure needs further investigation. It's not known if they can also spread the virus or even why they are asymptomatic.
Does it cause microcephaly?
It's the biggest health concern in the outbreak, yet the link with Zika and birth defects is still only "strongly suspected". Parts of Brazil that have seen cases of Zika have, several months later, also seen a surge in microcephaly. However, the trials to prove the link have not finished.
How risky is infection?
If the virus does cause microcephaly, how often does this happen? Does every infection lead to birth defects? Or is it one-in-100? One-in-10,000 perhaps? At the moment it's not clear how worried pregnant women should be.
Is there a risky period in pregnancy?
If the virus causes microcephaly, does it matter when you are infected? There have been some suggestions that the first trimester (the first 12 weeks) is key, but other doctors have hinted there might be risks as late as 29 weeks. And those risks could change over time.
How could it damage the brain?
Some infections, such as rubella, can damage the brains of developing babies during pregnancy. But it is not known how Zika could be crossing the placenta and damaging brain growth.
Does developing symptoms change the risk?
Around four-in-five people infected will not develop symptoms. Do silent infections carry the same risks of microcephaly as those which result in a fever or a rash? There is also the rare neurological disease Guillain-Barre syndrome that has been linked to Zika infection and we don't know which patients are most a risk.
What's going on in Africa and Asia?
The virus was first detected in Africa and then parts of Asia until it reached Brazil and then spread. So do these continents represent giant vulnerable populations susceptible to Zika outbreaks? Or has Zika been around and undetected there for years, so that most of the population are immune? It is hard to establish the global threat without knowing the answer.
How big is the surge in microcephaly really?
There are big questions about the quality of the data, both before the outbreak of Zika and now. The figures for previous years may be underestimates, and the number of suspected cases is an overestimate. Of the 4,783 reported cases of microcephaly - 404 have been confirmed, 709 have been disproved and 3,670 are still being investigated.
Can it be spread by other mosquitoes?
The Zika virus is spread by the Aedes aegypti mosquito, but it is confined to tropical and sub-tropical countries. There is concern that Zika could be spread by other mosquitoes too such as the Asian tiger mosquito. This species prefers more temperate climes such as parts of Europe.
How big a risk is sex?
It seems likely that the overwhelming majority of cases are spread by the Aedes mosquito where the insect bites a person with the virus and passes it onto the next person it bites. But sexual transmission has been implicated in a couple of infections. It's unknown how common this is.
What about immunity?
Are you infected once and then protected for life, like measles? Or does it take multiple infections to achieve immunity? How long does immunity last? These answers will tell us how long the outbreak could last and indicate whether a vaccine would be effective.
Follow James on Twitter.
Related Topics
Zika virus outbreak
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
Zika virus

Zika outbreak: What you need to know
31 August 2016
Zika outbreak: Travel advice
5 February 2016
Mothers' fears amid Zika outbreak
22 January 2016
Video

Video How mums-to-be are tackling Zika
28 January 2016
Video Zika virus: 'The worst day of my life'
26 January 2016
Video Zika virus: What you need to know
27 January 2016
Video Mother creates Zika virus support group
27 January 2016
Video What is happening to Brazil's babies?
21 January 2016
Read more

Abortion rules in countries affected by Zika
14 April 2016
Would it be wrong to eradicate mosquitoes?
28 January 2016
US issues fresh Zika virus guidance
26 January 2016
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Young men and women on the beach
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
6 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
HIV
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
 
More Videos from the BBC
 Jigsaw boss: Black Friday is a 'complete and utter deception'
Jigsaw boss: Black Friday is a 'complete and utter deception'
 Link between Shenzhen and HK stock markets goes live
Link between Shenzhen and HK stock markets goes live
 Maha Vajiralongkorn: Who is Thailand's new king?
Maha Vajiralongkorn: Who is Thailand's new king?
 Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
Pill anti-social behaviour has 'gone past a joke'
 Andrew Sachs: Fawlty Towers' 'I know nothing' scene
Andrew Sachs: Fawlty Towers' 'I know nothing' scene
 Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard appear at Allied premiere.
Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard appear at Allied premiere.
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 UK has 'first sexually transmitted Zika'
BBC News
UK has 'first sexually transmitted Zika'
 100 Women 2016: Parents who regret having children
BBC News
100 Women 2016: Parents who regret having children
 Thai Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn proclaimed king
BBC News
Thai Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn proclaimed king
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
BBC Future
The colossal African solar farm that could power Europe
 The power of a beam of light
BBC Culture
The power of a beam of light
 A museum of 500,000 oddities
BBC Travel
A museum of 500,000 oddities
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Beyond Limits: What’s Next in the Internet of Things?
Dassault Systemes
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport Revolution
Next-Gen Motors – We’re on the Cusp of a Transport…
Dassault Systemes
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
Famous Actors With Famous Parents
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
The Most Popular Song in Your Birth Year
The Most Popular Song in Your Birth Year
Bands & Musicians | Discography, Affiliations, Analytics
You Won't Believe Price for Jesse Owens' 1936 Olympic Medal
You Won't Believe Price for Jesse Owens' 1936…
Muscle & Fitness
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
High Return - South Korea
£50k-£1m To Invest? Free Review To Get You The Best Offshore Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Avoid Losing 55% Of £70k+ Pensions Download A Free Expat Pension Guide
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
