BBC
Accessibility links
Skip to contentAccessibility Help
Sign in
BBC navigation
News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
More
Search the BBC
Search
Search the BBC
News navigation
Home
Video
World
Asia
UK
Business
Tech
Science
Magazine
Entertainment & Arts
Health
selected
More sections
Health
Zika outbreak: What you need to know
31 August 2016
 From the section Health Related TopicsZika virus outbreak
Share
Child with microcephalyImage copyrightAP
Image caption
Dejailson Arruda and his daughter Luiza, who was born with microcephaly
Zika virus

Zika outbreak: Travel advice
Mothers' fears amid Zika outbreak
Video How mums-to-be are tackling Zika
Video Zika virus: 'The worst day of my life'
The World Health Organization has declared the Zika virus a global public health emergency.
The infection has been linked to thousands of babies being born with underdeveloped brains.
Some areas have declared a state of emergency, doctors have described it as "a pandemic in progress" and some are even advising women in affected countries to delay getting pregnant.
But there is much we do not know.
Grey line
What are the symptoms of Zika?
Deaths are rare and only one-in-five people infected is thought to develop symptoms.
These include:
mild fever
conjunctivitis (red, sore eyes)
headache
joint pain
a rash
A rare nervous system disorder, Guillain-Barré syndrome, that can cause temporary paralysis has been linked to the infection.
There is no vaccine or drug treatment so patients are advised to rest and drink plenty of fluids.
But the biggest concern is the impact it could have on babies developing in the womb and the surge in microcephaly.
Grey line
What is microcephaly?
Graphic showing babies' head size
It is when a baby is born with an abnormally small head, as their brain has not developed properly.
The severity varies, but it can be deadly if the brain is so underdeveloped that it cannot regulate the functions vital to life.
Children that do survive face intellectual disability and development delays.
It can be caused by infections such as rubella, substance abuse during pregnancy or genetic abnormalities.
Case study: 'It's not the end of the world'
The WHO says there is "scientific consensus" that Zika causes microcephaly as well as Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Some babies who died had the virus in their brain and it has been detected in placenta and amniotic fluid too.
Grey line
Is it safe to try for a baby?
Some governments have advised women to delay getting pregnant until more is known.
Experts now believe Zika is linked to a broader set of complications in pregnancy, including miscarriage, stillbirth, premature birth and eye problems.
The US Centres for Disease Control says Zika lingers in the blood for about a week and can be spread by sexual intercourse.
"The virus will not cause infections in a baby that is conceived after the virus is cleared from the blood," it says.
"There is currently no evidence that Zika-virus infection poses a risk of birth defects in future pregnancies."
The WHO advises couples practice safer sex or abstain for at least eight weeks if they are returning from Zika-affected areas. If the man in the couple planning a pregnancy develops Zika symptoms, then this period of abstinence or safe sex should be extended to six months.
Grey line
Why is it a public health emergency?
The WHO is worried that Zika is spreading far and fast, with devastating consequences.
Declaring Zika as a "public health emergency of international concern" singles the disease out as a serious global threat. It puts it in the same category of importance as Ebola.
Unlike Ebola, where the focus was on boots on the ground, with Zika the attention will be on understanding the link with microcephaly.
The WHO will co-ordinate countries' health agencies to conduct trials to determine the risk.
It will also encourage efforts to stop the mosquito that spreads the disease as well as finding a treatment or a vaccine to stop the virus.
The work will depend on money donated by countries.
World map showing past and present cases of Zika virus
Grey line
Where did Zika come from?
It was first identified in monkeys in Uganda in 1947.
The first human case was detected in Nigeria in 1954 and there have been further outbreaks in Africa, South East Asia and the Pacific Islands.
Zika spread map
Most were small and Zika has not previously been considered a major threat to human health.
But in May 2015 it was reported in Brazil and has since spread rapidly.
"Its current explosive pandemic re-emergence is, therefore, truly remarkable," the US National Institutes of Health said.
Grey line
How does it spread?
Aedes aegypti mosquitoesImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
It is spread by Aedes mosquitoes. They are the same insects that spread dengue and chikungunya virus.
They are found throughout the Americas except for Canada and Chile where it is too cold for them to survive, and across Asia.
Map of the global distribution of Aedes mosquitoes
Zika virus cycle
And, unlike the mosquitoes that spread malaria, they are mostly active during the day, so bed nets offer limited protection.
If they drink the blood of an infected person they can then infect subsequent people they bite.
The WHO says sexual transmission is also possible.
Grey line
How long are people infectious?
The best evidence so far suggests that people can spread the virus via mosquitoes for a week after being infected.
In semen it may persist for two weeks.
Countries have advised safe sex and a ban on blood donations for a month after just visiting such countries and for longer if they developed symptoms.
Grey line
What can people do?
As there is no treatment, the only option is to reduce the risk of being bitten.
Health officials advise people to:
use insect repellents
cover up with long-sleeved clothes
keep windows and doors closed
The mosquitoes lay their eggs in standing water, so people are also being told to empty buckets and flower pots.
The US Centers for Disease Control has advised pregnant women not to travel to affected areas.
Grey line
What is being done?
FumigationImage copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Brazilian Health Minister Marcelo Castro has said a new testing kit is being developed to identify infections quickly.
He also said more money was being put into the development of a vaccine.
Some scientists are also trialling the use of genetically modified sterile mosquitoes that appear to reduce mosquito populations by 90%.
Meanwhile, efforts are under way to kill the mosquitoes with insecticide.
Grey line
Zika vaccine
US experts from the National Institutes of Health say trials of a Zika vaccine will likely start in September this year. Depending on the results, larger trials could begin at the start of 2017.
"The very, very best scenario" would be a vaccine ready for the general public by the beginning of 2018, they say.
Related Topics
Zika virus outbreakBabies & Toddlers
Share this story About sharing
Email
Facebook
Messenger
Twitter
Pinterest
Linkedin
More on this story

Zika virus: Outbreak 'likely to spread across Americas' says WHO
25 January 2016
Zika: Olympics plans announced by Rio authorities
24 January 2016
Zika virus: Three Britons infected, say health officials
23 January 2016
Zika virus triggers pregnancy delay calls
23 January 2016
Brazil Zika: The mothers fearing for their babies
22 January 2016
Brazil Zika outbreak: More babies born with birth defects
21 January 2016
Zika virus

Zika outbreak: Travel advice
5 February 2016
Mothers' fears amid Zika outbreak
22 January 2016
Video

Video How mums-to-be are tackling Zika
28 January 2016
Video Zika virus: 'The worst day of my life'
26 January 2016
Video Zika virus: What you need to know
27 January 2016
Video Mother creates Zika virus support group
27 January 2016
Video What is happening to Brazil's babies?
21 January 2016
Read more

Abortion rules in countries affected by Zika
14 April 2016
Would it be wrong to eradicate mosquitoes?
28 January 2016
US issues fresh Zika virus guidance
26 January 2016
Health
In the UK, about one in four babies are born by caesarean
Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
5 December 2016
From the section Science & Environment
Full article Caesarean births 'affecting evolution'
Young men and women on the beach
Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
6 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article Pubic hair grooming 'STI risk from cuts'
HIV
HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
4 December 2016
 From the section Health
Full article HIV 'game-changer' now on NHS
 
More Videos from the BBC
 100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
100 Women 2016: Women walk streets of Mumbai after midnight
 'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
'Embarrassed' Obama daughters skip turkey pardon
 Raised in the UK but 'blocked' from going to university
Raised in the UK but 'blocked' from going to university
 Niccolo Machiavelli 'has jumped cultures' says McTernan
Niccolo Machiavelli 'has jumped cultures' says McTernan
 Italy referendum: Matteo Renzi resigns 'with lump in throat'
Italy referendum: Matteo Renzi resigns 'with lump in throat'
 Hunt for Co-op Santa sleighs that delighted 1950s families
Hunt for Co-op Santa sleighs that delighted 1950s families
Recommended by Outbrain
 
Elsewhere on BBC
 'It is time to make' three-person babies
BBC News
'It is time to make' three-person babies
 John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
BBC News
John Key resigns: Where now for the NZ-Australian political bromance?
 Standing Rock: US Army refuses N Dakota pipeline access
BBC News
Standing Rock: US Army refuses N Dakota pipeline access
Recommended by Outbrain
 
You Might Also Like
 The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
BBC Future
The new words that expose our smartphone obsessions
 Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
BBC Future
Astronaut Ron Garan: Why we need a new definition for ‘home’
 Why we should send politicians to space
BBC Future
Why we should send politicians to space
Top Stories
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
One of India's most influential and colourful politicians, J Jayalalitha, dies at the age of 68.
1 hour ago
Russia, China block UN vote on Aleppo
5 hours ago
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
5 hours ago
ADVERTISEMENT

Features & Analysis

charity heart
Give and take
Fury at dad who asked for charity - even though he's well-off
 Do Thi Net sits with her daughters Nguyen Thi Ten and Nguyen Thi Sen
Fighting for Vietnam
Portraits of the female veterans who risked their lives
 Dominic Ongwen (2008 file image)
Snatched and inducted
Should a former child soldier be put on trial?
 A hijabi fashion influencer VIDEO
Headscarf revolution
The hipster and Muslim rock chicks taking on the hijab
 Fembot character advertising Svedka vodka
Chatbot sexism
Why are so many digital assistants "female"?
 Fake US Embassy in Accra
Fake embassy
How did criminals get away with visa scam for so long?
 RoboTrump VIDEO 2:01
Latinos v Donald Trump
A darkly funny depiction of the next US president
 Luther Windley
Safe haven no more
Descendants of slaves fight to hang on to prime real estate
 Lina Hussain
'Hunted down'
Afghan woman migrant pursued to Europe by husband
 
Most Popular popular
Read selected
Watched
Most read
1
'No need' for MPs to decide on Brexit
2
Hot car death father sentenced to life
3
Italy PM Renzi to quit after budget
4
How did fake US embassy operate in Ghana for a decade?
5
The homeless man who became a multi-millionaire
6
Al Gore holds climate talks with Trump
7
Helen Marten wins £25,000 Turner Prize
8
Grief as India's 'Iron Lady' dies
9
Amazon to open a shop with no checkouts
10
The viral video with a hidden message
 
From Around the Web
 Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Rethink the way we imagine the packaging!
Dassault Systemes
Is under-water habitation a near-future possibility?!!!
Is under-water habitation a near-future…
Dassault Systemes
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this language learning app!
Over 1 million people have fallen in love with this…
Babbel
The Worst of the Worst: Each MLB Team's Least Valuable Player
The Worst of the Worst: Each MLB Team's Least…
PointAfter | By Graphiq
39 Worst Movies Ranked From Bad to Really Bad
39 Worst Movies Ranked From Bad to Really Bad
PrettyFamous | By Graphiq
Ranking the Presidents with the Lowest IQs
Ranking the Presidents with the Lowest IQs
InsideGov | By Graphiq
Promoted content by Outbrain
Ads by Google
Expat In South Korea?
£50k+ Savings? Try A Free Review To Show You The Best Interest Rates!
expatsavingsreview.com
UK Expat In South Korea?
Discover How You Could Get A Better £70k+ Pension. Free Guide & Review!
your.expatpensionreview.com
British Expat in Korea?
Avoid Losing 45% of your UK pension Move your pension. Free Guide!
www.forthcapital.com/PensionAdvice
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On your connected tv
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Explore the BBC

News
Sport
Weather
Shop
Earth
Travel
Capital
Culture
Autos
Future
TV
Radio
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
iWonder
Bitesize
Music
Arts
Make It Digital
Taster
Nature
Local
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Advertise with us
Ad choices
Copyright © 2016 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
